FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Scale-Aware Modeling of Instabilities and Mixing in HED Flows
Dr. Hussein Aluie, Assistant Professor
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
Instabilities and mixing are detrimental to system performance in high-energy density (HED)
applications such as fusion power systems. Numerical models used in HED applications have had
significant difficulties predicting the instabilities and mixing that occur in experiments. Most of these
“global-system” models cannot resolve a sufficient level of vorticity that develops hydrodynamically.
Recent evidence from several independent investigations indicates that this shortcoming contributes to
under-predicting the levels of instability growth and mixing in such highly nonlinear flows. Routinely
conducting multi-physics global-system three-dimensional simulations at the high resolution required to
resolve the missing vorticity is not feasible in the foreseeable future due to the exorbitant computing cost.
To address this problem, a “coarse-graining” scale-analysis approach that is versatile and powerful will be
used to develop a nonlinear mixing model (NMM) capable of accounting for the missing vorticity in a self-
consistent manner. Coarse-graining has a rigorous mathematical foundation and is closely related to well-
established physics techniques, including macroscopic electromagnetism, renormalization group, and
Large Eddy Simulations. NMM is a deterministic model of vorticity and strain that is “scale-aware” in the
sense that it self-adjusts to the underlying numerical resolution without relying on user input. NMM is
also portable in the sense that it is not dependent on a particular numerical scheme and can be eventually
deployed in HED application codes. With that eventual goal in sight, the research plan includes an
extensive development, testing, and validation program. The project should enable HED application
codes, such as those used in fusion, to better predict instability growth and mixing at a significantly lower
computational cost. The project may also prove valuable beyond HED applications by advancing a new
systematic approach to devising deterministic scale-aware models that reflect the latent unresolved
physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
New Correlated Numerical Methods for Attosecond Molecular Single and Double Ionization
Dr. Luca Argenti, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32826
The correlated character of electronic motion affects the energy balance of all light-induced
microscopic processes in matter, from those triggered in atoms, to those in photoreceptors for solar-
energy conversion. Electronic excitations, which are at the core of any chemical transformation, evolve
on the fantastically short timescale of the attosecond (one attosecond is one billionth of a billionth of a
second). The advent of attosecond spectroscopies has made it possible to study the motion of electrons
at its natural timescale. Intense extreme ultraviolet (XUV) light pulses can both excite and image electrons
in matter, drastically enhancing the space and time resolution with which ionization can be controlled.
Ultrashort soft-x-rays can ionize molecules from highly localized core orbitals. The emitted electrons,
scattered by neighboring nuclei, encode geometry of a molecule as it changes in time. If detected in
coincidence, two electrons emitted by the same molecule give direct information on their concerted
motion in a chemical bond prior to ionization. The theoretical description of these phenomena is essential
to control ultrafast dynamics in matter. This project will develop the numerical tools needed for the time-
dependent description of molecular single and double-ionization processes, with a quantitative account
of light-driven static and dynamic electronic correlation. Such endeavor will make it possible to image
correlated electronic motion, thus opening the way to a transformative expansion of attosecond science,
and of quantum chemistry itself.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Probing Electrochemical Reactivity Under Nanoconfinement
Using Molecularly Pillared Two Dimensional Materials
Dr. Veronica Augustyn, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
The goal of this proposed research is to understand how the confinement of liquid phase reactants
within the layers of a two dimensional material influences their electrochemical reaction kinetics. The
hypothesis driving this research is that there will be an optimum interlayer spacing of layered materials
to enable electrochemical reactivity in the interlayer. Layered and 2D materials have broad applications
in catalysis and electrocatalysis, where it is hypothesized that the catalytically active sites reside at edges
and surface defects. This proposed research will investigate how the nanoconfined interlayer of these
materials can be made accessible for electrocatalytic activity. Nanoconfinement has been shown to affect
the physical properties of molecules and solvents and may be utilized to further tune electrochemical
activity. Importantly, the research will utilize a materials chemistry approach to define the
nanoconfinement environment via molecular pillars – molecules of defined length anchored within the
interlayer. In order to test this hypothesis, the proposed research will investigate how molecular pillaring
of a prototypical layered material, MoS , influences the electrocatalysis of the hydrogen evolution
2
reaction, a critical step in the electrochemical synthesis of hydrogen fuel. The scientific merits of this
proposed research include: (1) the control of matter at the atomic scale to define nanoconfinement
geometry, (2) the characterization of the dynamics of nanoconfined solvents within the hybridized layered
materials, and (3) the mechanistic understanding of a liquid-phase electrochemical reaction under
nanoconfinement by the hybridized layered materials. The understanding developed over the course of
this research will be applicable to both fundamental and applied energy research, from electrochemistry
and materials chemistry, to fuel cells and electrolyzers.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Systematics of Precision Neutron Physics Experiments
Dr. Leah Broussard
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The neutron is an exceptional tool for sensitive searches for new particles and interactions beyond
our Standard Model of Particle Physics. This research will characterize the influence of several effects that
limit the ultimate physics reach of two experiments at the Spallation Neutron Source which test our
understanding of the fundamental symmetries of nature—Nab (for Neutron 'a' 'b') and nEDM (for neutron
Electric Dipole Moment). Nab will study neutron beta decay to improve our understanding of the weak
interaction. This research will develop a detector test station to benchmark simulations of charge
collection in the Nab detectors and study the impact on electron energy loss effects and the measured
trigger time of electrons and protons. Meanwhile, nEDM will search for a new source of a violation
of Time-reversal (T) symmetry in the neutron's electric dipole moment. T-symmetry, or whether the laws
of physics are the same when time runs forward or backwards, must be violated to explain why our
universe is matter dominated. This research will leverage the Summit supercomputer to develop fast spin
tracking simulations in realistic models of the experiment to calculate effects which limited the ultimate
precision of the previous best experiment. The outcome of this research will allow Nab to characterize
the weak interaction with similar sensitivity to nuclear systems, where a discrepancy from Standard Model
predictions is observed, and ensure that nEDM can realize its full potential in probing the parameter space
of theories which predict a matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Spatiotemporal Mapping of Lignocellulose Decomposition by a Naturally Evolved Fungal Garden
Microbial Consortium
Dr. Kristin Burnum-Johnson, Scientist
Biological Sciences Division
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
Some microbial communities composed of bacteria and fungi can readily breakdown plant matter
into its component sugars. Leaf-cutter ants take advantage of such microbial communities by maintaining
fungal gardens that release energy-rich carbohydrates from plant biomass. As these decomposition
products are released, they are consumed by bacteria that also live in the garden and in turn, further
transform those products into nutrients that promote fungal growth. This symbiotic system has great
potential for biological production of biofuels and bioproduct precursors from plant biomass. However,
the identity of most of the microbial species and their precise role within the fungal gardens is not known.
This project will carry out a multi-omics approach to uncover the mechanisms that drive cooperative
fungal-bacterial interactions that result in the degradation of lignocellulosic plant material extracted from
the fungal garden ecosystem. To understand how the fungal garden is able to degrade plant matter with
such efficiency, it is necessary to study the metabolic interactions and biochemical pathways utilized by
its microorganisms in each microscopic region of the fungal garden. This research will accomplish that
with a novel microscale proteomics approach that can analyze very small samples, providing detailed
information on the location and function of fungal and bacterial proteins. This approach will provide the
knowledge needed for a predictive systems-level understanding of the fungal-bacterial metabolic and
signaling interactions that occur during cellulose deconstruction in an efficient, natural ecosystem and
should provide new strategies for generating precursors of advanced biofuels. This knowledge will provide
the foundation for developing efficient consortia composed by well-defined and optimized microbial
strains to efficiently produce valuable compounds from lignocellulosic feedstocks, advancing DOE’s goal
of developing sustainable bioenergy resources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Boosting New Physics Searches with Higgs Differential Cross-Section Measurements
Dr. Viviana Cavaliere, Assistant Physicist
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
Upton, New York 11973
The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics describes our current best understanding of the
elementary constituents of matter and their interactions. Despite the success of the SM, a number of
observed phenomena in our universe are not well-described to the extent that prevailing results point to
the existence of a more fundamental theory. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the world’s most energetic
particle accelerator complex, at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland is
in a unique position to provide critical insights into the SM puzzle. Direct searches so far have shown little
to no hints of new particles, indicating that new physics might be at higher energy scales. Precision
measurements, which can provide access to physics beyond the SM, are therefore becoming increasingly
critical to the experimental research program at the energy frontier. This research program plans to use
data from the ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) experiment at the LHC to measure the differential cross-
section of diboson processes in final states with a Higgs boson. Such measurements are sensitive to new
particles, which may be too heavy to be clearly seen at the LHC. Further, the sensitivity to new physics
phenomena will be increased through the high luminosity upgrade of the ATLAS detector presently being
carried out for the future High-Luminosity LHC running period, which is planned to begin in 2026. To
maintain the efficient data collection, the program also entails the upgrade of the real-time data selection
process, or trigger, by implementing new sophisticated algorithms that will increase the acceptance to
the final states being studied. Overall, the impact on our understanding of fundamental physics will be
dramatic, enabling us to either severely constrain possible extensions of the SM or discover new particles
or interactions arising in the universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Development of Novel Relativistic Electronic Structure Methods for Actinide-Containing Compounds
Dr. Lan Cheng, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
As electrons in "heavy atoms" with large nuclear charge often move at speeds comparable to the
speed of light, special relativity has profound influence on electronic structure and properties of
compounds containing heavy atoms. Consequently, treatment of relativistic effects has emerged as a
major challenge for theoretical and computational description of molecules containing heavy atoms. The
objective of this research is to provide significantly enhanced capabilities for theoretical and
computational study of molecules containing heavy elements, especially actinides, which play essential
roles in basic energy science. One major obstacle in relativistic quantum-mechanical computations of
actinide-containing molecules with sufficient consideration of correlation between electrons is the high
computational cost because of spin-symmetry breaking due to the presence of spin-orbit coupling.
Namely, with the interaction between electron spin and orbital angular momenta, electrons with
different spins are coupled together and this increases the required computational resources by more
than an order of magnitude. The present work is based on a simple idea of partial recovery of spin
symmetry to enhance computational efficiency for calculations with accurate treatment of electron
correlation. This research aims to provide efficient computational tools generally applicable to sizable
actinide-containing molecules. The applications of the new methods and computational tools focus on
classic problems in molecules containing actinides and deal with the response of these molecules to
optical and magnetic interactions. The new methods can treat relativistic effects and electron correlation
with an unprecedented level of accuracy, and thus are promising candidates to solve these problems and
others in this milieu of chemistry.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Probing Anionic Electron Behavior in Electrides
Dr. Miaofang Chi, Research and Development Staff Scientist
Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Recently discovered electride materials offer untapped electronic and chemical properties with the
potential to transform next-generation nanoelectronics and energy technologies. However, electrides are
only beginning to be characterized and understood. These materials have unusual structures with loosely-
arranged electrons that offer rich physics and exotic properties, including superconducting, topologically
insulating, magnetic, and high-catalytic activities. This research will develop the first experimental
technique to probe electride materials and measure their responses to stimuli such as temperature or
electricity at unprecedented nanoscale resolution. To achieve this, scanning transmission electron
microscopy will be tuned to “see” the functional electrons in materials undergoing dynamic changes,
thereby opening possibilities for fine-tuning electrides at the atomic-level to achieve desirable properties.
The fundamental outcomes of this research will greatly expand the ability to study electrides, as well as
other quantum materials, and further launch the design and discovery of new materials for broad energy
applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
EIC physics from Lattice QCD
Dr. Martha Constantinou
Department of Physics
Temple University – Philadelphia
Philadelphia, PA 19122
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory of the strong interaction, which binds quarks and
gluons to form a spectrum of hadrons, which includes the pions, kaons, and protons. Lattice QCD (LQCD)
is an ideal formulation to study the properties and the immensely rich structure of the hadrons with large-
scale numerical simulations. The program focuses on LQCD calculations of non-perturbative quantities
that encapsulate the dynamics of quarks and gluons within the pions, kaons, and protons, which is
necessary for a deeper understanding of nuclear matter. It addresses open questions, such as the origin
of the mass and spin decompositions. Both topics were identified as priority science questions in the
recent assessment report of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, on a future
Electron-Ion Collider (EIC). This program supports the science of the EIC with studies of parton distribution
functions (PDFs) and generalized parton distributions (GPDs) using two approaches: via their Mellin
moments, and via the so-called quasi-distributions. Specific quantities under investigation are form
factors and generalized form factors for the unpolarized, helicity and transversity distribution
functions. The calculations are based on cutting edge methods for a set of simulations with the quark
masses fixed to their physical value. This eliminates a large number of systematic uncertainties, which is
crucial for reliable input to experiments, and for comparison to existing measurements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
High-Efficiency Solar-To-Fuel Photoelectrochemistry in Disordered Photonic Glass Electrodes
Dr. Robert Coridan, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of Arkansas
Fayetteville, AR 72701
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) solar energy conversion applications (water splitting, dye-sensitized
solar cells, CO reduction, etc.) rely on chemical reactions driven by photogenerated minority carriers at
2
a semiconductor-liquid junction. The carriers must be sufficiently long-lived to migrate to the
semiconductor-electrocatalyst-electrolyte interface, where they are collected via energy storing redox
reactions. Nanostructure can be engineered into photoelectrodes to trap light near the interface, thereby
promoting absorption in regions of the semiconductor that improve the likelihood of collecting carriers
versus losing them to recombination. Disordered assemblies of nanospheres can induce emergent ‘slow’
modes that can localize light along tortuous ‘paths’ through the long dimension of the electrode (multiple
scattering) or in small volumes (Anderson localization). Defects in disordered materials can act as high-
quality optical cavities or waveguides. This project seeks to develop the approach for improving the
efficiency of PEC materials by controlling emergent photonic modes in disordered nanostructures. The
specific aim is to advance the use of optical cavities at defects in disordered nanosphere materials as a
new light-trapping nanostructure for photocatalytic (PC) or PEC energy conversion applications. This
project outlines an integrated approach based on machine learning-driven light-absorption simulations,
high-resolution materials characterization, and novel modes of materials synthesis to identify powerful
strategies for utilizing disordered photonics in solar-to-fuels applications. The goals of the project include
1) simulating the optoelectronic properties of disordered photonic glasses based on the parameters
defining the statistical structure (filling fraction of nanospheres, diameter of the cavity, and the local
dielectric environment), 2) identifying synthetic methods for selectively functionalizing the defect cavities
of electrodes, and 3) developing experimental methods to characterize the optical and
photochemical/photo-electrochemical properties of the defect structures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences
and the DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Using Ultrafast Entangled Photon Correlations to Measure the Temporal Evolution
of Optically Excited Molecular Entanglement
Dr. Scott Cushing, Assistant Professor
Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
Entangled photons can be created by splitting one photon into two lower energy photons via the
process of spontaneous parametric down-conversion. The resultant pair of photons, however, can still act
as one photon in subsequent light-matter interactions. For example, an entangled photon pair has a
molecular absorption cross section close to that of a single photon, will only leave the same side of a 50:50
beamsplitter, and diffract at half their wavelength. The goal of this project is to measure how the
entangled photons’ properties are temporally transferred to a molecular spin state. This includes
measuring how quantum and classical decoherence routes control entanglement, the timescale of these
processes, and whether or not these quantum states can be transferred to a secondary, electronically
coupled system. To probe these questions, a few-femtosecond, few-photon entangled spectrometer will
be constructed. The proposal will answer fundamental questions about entangled light-matter
interactions as well as create new avenues in ultrafast spectroscopy through the application of
entanglement.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Analog and Digital Quantum Simulations of Strongly Interacting Theories
for Applications in Nuclear Physics
Dr. Zohreh Davoudi
Department of Physics
University of Maryland - College Park
College Park, MD 20742
Classical-computing methods have proven extremely successful in obtaining certain properties of
strongly interacting systems of hadrons and nuclei. Nonetheless, it is known that a number of grand-
challenge problems in nuclear physics remain theoretically intractable. These include investigations into
the real-time dynamics of matter after the Big Bang, or after the collision of energetic nuclei in the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. These also include studies of the properties of dense systems in nature,
such as the possibility of exotic phases of matter in the interior of neutron stars. Recent technological
advances in scalable quantum-computing platforms provide an exciting possibility in harnessing quantum
entanglement to perform highly-parallelized computations of systems in nuclear physics with a large
number of correlated degrees of freedom. The overarching goal of this project is to fill in the gap between
our classical and quantum approaches to simulating nuclear phenomena from the microscopic theory,
i.e., the Standard Model of particle physics at a finer level, and nuclear effective field theories at a coarser
level. With a focus on the question of how to map strongly interacting field theories to a quantum-bit
(qubit) description, two avenues of research will be pursued. First, novel schemes for analog simulations
of simple lattice gauge theories and effective field theories of nuclei will be developed and simultaneously
tested on the world’s leading Ion Trap quantum-simulation platforms. Second, similar theories will be
studied theoretically, and will be benchmarked on available digital quantum computing devices. The
benefits and disadvantages of each approach will be studied and quantum-resource estimates will be
provided for reaching certain levels of accuracy in obtaining properties of the systems under investigation.
This research, while being only a first step toward the ultimate goal of conquering computationally
challenging problems in nuclear physics, will pave the way toward leveraging quantum-computing
capabilities for research in nuclear physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Porin Inspired Ionomers with Sub-nm Gated Ion Channels for High Ion Conductivity and Selectivity
Dr. Shudipto Konika Dishari, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68583
Imagine a group of people standing side-by-side and passing refreshments from one person to the
next. If the people are water molecules and the refreshments are protons (atomic hydrogen after stripping
off an electron), then this perfectly explains proton transport in an ideal scenario. Water molecules need
to be aligned and connected with each other to transport protons from one water molecule to the
next. Natural living systems do so using porins in the cell membranes. Porins are barrel shaped
biomolecules that act like pores allowing transport of ions from the outside environment to the inside of
the cells and vice versa. Porins also act like gates that can control ion trafficking and the direction of ion
transport. If these unique concepts can be used in the design of man-made ion conducting polymer
mimics, unprecedented control over ion conduction pathways can be achieved at the molecular level. This
research will explore a novel class of ion conducting polymer by incorporating porin mimicking functional
repeat units in the polymer chains and introducing gating functionalities to those units. These porin
mimicking units of the polymer chains will act like ion conducting water channels that inhibit the transport
of larger ions and selectively transport smaller ions, like protons. Such a design can be beneficial for ion
conducting polymer membranes used in redox flow batteries. The gating functionality of the porin
mimicking units will help gain control over proton accumulation within polymeric systems. This is
important as proton accumulation negatively impacts fuel cell efficiency. Studying the roles of gating
nature, polymer structure, and molecular packing on ion conductivity and selectivity for certain ions will
guide the future designs of ion conducting polymers for energy conversion and storage devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and
the DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
New Tools for Strongly Coupled Quantum Field Theories
Dr. Thomas Dumitrescu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California 90095-1406
Quantum field theory (QFT) is a unifying language that pervades many areas of modern physics,
including particle physics, string theory, and condensed matter physics. Nevertheless, it is typically very
challenging to extract physical predictions from a given QFT. Conventional methods only apply when the
QFT is weakly coupled (i.e. essentially non-interacting), while many QFTs of interest are strongly coupled
and thus not amenable to these approaches. The primary goal of this research is the development and
application of new tools for analyzing strongly coupled QFTs. These tools are based on different notions
of symmetries, which can be used to simplify QFT problems even in the strong-coupling regime.
Supersymmetry (SUSY) plays a particularly important role in this research. While SUSY QFTs often arise in
the context of string theory or particle physics beyond the Standard Model, this research uses them as a
fruitful theoretical laboratory for exploring QFTs at strong coupling.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Discovering Dark Matter Clumps and Primordial Particles with Galaxies
Dr. Cora Dvorkin, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138-5369
Cosmological observations and galaxy dynamics seem to imply that five out of six parts in mass of all
matter in the universe is composed of dark matter, which is not accounted for by the Standard Model of
particle physics. The cold dark matter (CDM) paradigm has been extremely successful at describing
observations on large-cosmological scale. However, many different dark matter candidates have the same
observable effects as CDM on large-length scales. One possible avenue to distinguish between these
different models is to look on much smaller-length scales, where usually dark matter models become
distinguishable. This research will develop the theoretical framework and statistical tools needed to map
the detailed distribution of dark matter on subgalactic scales using strong gravitational lensing. A second
goal of this research is to build new statistical techniques that efficiently exploit the full power of cosmic-
structure data from next-generation surveys. Galaxy clustering on large scales provides significant
cosmological information through the power spectrum. Additional information can be gained from higher-
order statistics. This research will provide new ways to understand the nature of dark matter and the
initial conditions of the universe from current and upcoming cosmological surveys.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Multi-Probe Cosmology with DES and LSST
Dr. Tim Eifler, Assistant Professor
Astronomy Department
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona 85721-0158
Ongoing and future DOE experiments, including the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope (LSST), aim to unveil the physical mechanism causing the accelerated expansion of the
Universe. Possible theoretical explanations require fundamentally new physics, elevating the topic of
“dark energy” into one of the most exciting problems in science today. In order to discover new physics
in the great laboratory that is our Universe it is critical to control systematics at a new level of precision.
The main objective of this research program is to develop novel data analysis techniques to combine
multiple cosmological measurements extracted from DES and later LSST data and to control systematics
at the level required to extract the cosmological information. Working across a variety of science areas,
such as cosmology, astrophysics, computer science, and statistical methods this research explores
whether dark energy is explained by Einstein’s cosmological constant, whether it shows variations as a
function of time, or whether the theory of General Relativity itself must be modified. Ultimately, this
science program paves the way for a joint analysis of LSST in combination with the Cosmic Microwave
Background (CMB) experiments of the mid 2020s such as the DOE-led CMB-Stage 4 experiment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
The Role of Cooperative Interactions among Surfaces, Solvents, and Reactive Intermediates
on Catalysis at Liquid-Solid Interfaces
Dr. David Flaherty, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61820
Catalytic reactions at solid-liquid interfaces formed between solvent mixtures and the surface of a
heterogeneous catalyst possess the complexities of catalysis at gas-solid interfaces, but then are further
complicated by interactions of solvent molecules. The presence of solvating molecules introduces specific
interactions among solvent molecules, catalyst surfaces, and reactive species that can change turnover
rates and selectivities when different solvents are implemented for catalytic reactions, such as hydrogen
transfer, alkene oligomerization, coupling reactions, and selective oxidations. These complex interactions
couple fast, short range electron transfer and transformations at active sites to slower, long range changes
in the solvent structure. Intuition for the effects of solvents on chemical reactions exists; however, these
heuristics do not account for surfaces and often fail for heterogeneous catalysts. This research will
quantify the impact and elucidate the molecular motifs of solvent-mediated interactions between reactive
species and the extended surface of solid catalysts, which will provide new approaches for engineering
solid-liquid interfaces for selective catalytic reactions. These effects can be used to increase turnover rates
and selectivities for liquid-phase alkene epoxidations in porous materials by orders of magnitude. The
effects depend on the surface topology around catalytically active sites; the size and hydrogen bonding
nature of the solvent; and the specific interactions of the solvent with reactive intermediates on the
surface. Knowledge generated in this work will show how catalytic rates and selectivities depend on
coupling between solvent dynamics and surface kinetics and how these processes are impacted by the
extended surface of the solid catalyst, beyond the active site. Ultimately this will provide broad insight for
how solvents facilitate catalysis at surfaces and yield potentially transformative principles to engineer
solid-liquid interfaces for catalytic conversion of domestic resources, including light hydrocarbons and
renewable biomass.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Nuclear Astrophysics through Simulations of Neutron Star Mergers
Using Monte-Carlo Neutrino Radiation Transport
Dr. Francois Foucart
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of New Hampshire – Durham
Durham, NH 03824
The merger of two neutron stars is a remarkable laboratory for nuclear astrophysics. By observing
merging neutron stars, we improve our understanding of dense nuclear matter, the origin of heavy
elements likely produced in merger events (e.g. gold, platinum,…), or even the properties of
neutrinos. Studies of neutron star mergers thus complement studies of dense matter and heavy nuclei
conducted within DOE laboratories. To reliably extract nuclear physics information from merger
observations, however, accurate numerical simulations of these events are necessary. Existing
simulations have two critical limitations: their resolution is not sufficient to capture important small scale
instabilities in the evolution of magnetic fields, and they only approximately evolve neutrinos, despite
their crucial role in determining the outcome of nucleosynthesis in mergers. The first objective of this
project is to develop an algorithm that truly evolves the equations governing neutrino transport (using
Monte-Carlo methods), a long-standing objective that modern computational resources have finally put
within our reach. This algorithm will then be implemented in a next-generation open-source code that
can leverage upcoming computing facilities to perform high-resolution simulations of neutron star
mergers. The second objective of this research is the inclusion of more detailed nuclear physics in the
evolution of the matter ejected by mergers, where heavy elements are synthesized. Finally, the last
objective of this project is to use these new methods in simulations that can reliably predict the production
of heavy elements in neutron star mergers, as well as the impact of the properties of dense matter on the
optical and infrared signals that mergers power, thus increasing the payoff of neutron star merger
observations for nuclear physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Mechanistic Tuning of Chemical Transformations for Coupling the
Geo-mimicry of Acid Gas Storage with Design Strategies to Produce
Clean Energy Carriers in Multi-Phase Reaction Environments (MATTER)
Dr. Greeshma Gadikota, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Cornell University*
Ithaca, NY 14850
Developing transformative and adaptive energy generating processes with in-built environmental
controls is essential for meeting our growing needs for energy and resources in a sustainable manner.
Achieving these outcomes requires harnessing coupled reaction pathways to simultaneously synthesize
targeted molecules in the fluid and solid phases in a single system. One example in this context is the
directed synthesis of H and Ca-or-Mg-bearing carbonates in gas-liquid-solid environments starting from
2
the reactants in the water gas shift reaction which are CO and H O, and earth abundant minerals such as
2
forsterite (Mg SiO ) and wollastonite (CaSiO ) as the chemical building blocks. However, in far from
2 4 3
equilibrium environments, critical scientific insights into the reaction pathways remain locked in transient
kinetics. To address this challenge, we propose to create a multi-modal non-invasive experimental
strategy that harnesses synchrotron X-ray scattering and tomography techniques. This experimental
methodology allows us to probe and link structural and morphological transformations in multiphase
environments to the kinetics at far-from-equilibrium and at equilibrium conditions. This research
approach will allow us to develop a chemo-morphological basis for designing targeted reaction pathways
to direct the synthesis of clean energy carriers such as H while capturing, converting and storing CO as
2 2
Ca- and Mg-carbonates.
*Proposal originally submitted by the University of Wisconsin
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Mechanics of Materials’ Interaction with Electromagnetic Waves in Accelerator Cavities
Dr. Diana Gamzina, Staff Scientist
Technology Innovation Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
To realize high performance and cost effective accelerators and RF sources, our focus must shift
to development of materials’ microstructure with significantly higher resistance to degradation than what
is employed today. A synthesis pathway toward materials that are an order of magnitude more resistant
to RF induced degradation will be developed under this effort. The synthesis pathway will follow materials’
microstructure evolution through the stages of its lifetime: (1) initial production, (2) assembly and
processing steps (joining, bake-out), (3) conditioning, and (4) long-term operation. An elasto-plastic model
of the material’s response to RF surface fields, relating material microstructural state (grain size, texture,
morphology, purity, presence of defects) to surface electromagnetic fields will guide the synthesis
pathway development. Finally, the mechanics of materials’ interaction with RF will be characterized using
newly developed in-situ RF-pump / X-ray probe diffraction technique (at room temperatures and at 2 K)
allowing to measure temporal evolution of materials’ microstructural state and validate the materials
model. This effort broadens the RF accelerator science and technology field with innovations in materials
synthesis, characterization, and modeling. It also impacts progress in millimeter-wave and terahertz RF
source technologies, which are currently limited in RF output power by materials employed in their circuit
structures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Ultrafast Visualization of Hydrodynamic Evolution: Understanding Void Collapse
at Extreme High-Pressure Conditions
Dr. Arianna Gleason, Staff Scientist
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Mesoscale imperfections, such as voids, play a crucial role in the physical and chemical behavior of
all materials. The need to understand how voids dictate materials performance under extreme conditions
cross-cuts geophysics, astrobiological physics, planetary-, fusion energy-, and national security- science.
New research will combine ultrafast X-ray probes with laser-shock compression at the Matter in Extreme
Conditions instrument at the Linac Coherent Light Source to study the microphysics of void collapse
processes. Novel time-resolved, coherent diffractive X-ray imaging methods will yield atomic-level movies
of the void collapse process during the passage of a shock wave. These measurements will inform
materials models that are critical for solving a variety of physics problems across the mission space of
Fusion Energy Sciences. In particular, hydrodynamic instabilities, seeded by void collapse in dynamically
compressed materials, are one of the main obstacles to achieving fusion ignition in the laboratory. Real-
time measurements will reveal how void size and geometry dictate rapid heating effects and nonlinear
shockwave interactions leading to plasma jet formation and phase transformation/degradation in the
surrounding material. This new methodology will provide experimental data with the precision to test
materials functionality and theoretical models in a regime where no previous data exist.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Development of a Laser Calibration System for the DUNE Far Detector
Dr. Sowjanya Gollapinni, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Tennessee
Knoxville, Tennessee 37996-1529
Neutrino related discoveries in the last two decades indicate that the answer to the most sought-
after question of why we live in a matter-dominated universe may be within reach. The Deep
Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) which forms the next generation long-baseline neutrino
oscillation experiment aims to address this question by studying the differences in propagation between
neutrinos and anti-neutrinos traveling over a distance of 1300 km from Fermilab to South Dakota. DUNE
will consist of two detectors, one detector installed at Fermilab and a second, much larger, detector will
be installed more than a kilometer underground at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in
Lead, South Dakota. DUNE will use the cutting-edge liquid argon time projection chamber (LArTPC)
technology to detect neutrino interactions at the far site. DUNE presents a unique challenge for calibration
in many ways. Not only because of its size—the largest LArTPC ever constructed – but also because of its
depth. It differs both from existing long-baseline neutrino detectors, and existing LArTPCs due to its deep
underground location. For DUNE, to fully exploit the capabilities of a LArTPC and to make convincing
physics measurements, a detailed understanding of the detector response is essential. The main objective
of this research is to develop a laser-based calibration system for DUNE, with the ultimate goal of testing
and validating the design and performance of the system along with data analysis in the run-II phase of
the DUNE prototype detectors, ProtoDUNEs, located at the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN), Switzerland. This work will enable DUNE to reduce systematic uncertainties arising from detector
response model and correctly predict the far detector energy spectra that indicate the neutrino
oscillations for which DUNE is searching.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Lithium–Divertor Interactions and Helium/Hydrogen Trapping in Lithiated Metals
Dr. Karl D. Hammond, Assistant Professor
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
Producing energy from controlled nuclear fusion reactions on Earth is a formidable challenge. One
potential path to commercial nuclear fusion energy is magnetic confinement fusion, which uses magnetic
fields to confine the extremely hot, ionized gases that undergo nuclear fusion and prevent them from
touching the container. Injecting lithium into fusion reactors or coating the reactor walls with lithium is
an active area of research intended to increase the difference in temperature between the hot, ionized
gases in the center, where the fusion reaction occurs, and the relatively cool solid walls of the reactor.
This research examines the fate of helium—the biproduct of the fusion reaction—and ascertains whether
and how it will accumulate at the interface between lithium deposits and the reactor walls. Helium
accumulation can increase the amount of fuel that is collected in the walls (where it is unable to react),
decrease the lifetime of reactor components, and change material properties and heat transfer rates. The
research employs computer simulation of the relevant physical processes, which occur at length scales
ranging from atomic and molecular dimensions up to tens of nanometers. The ultimate goal of this line of
research is to construct a working model that predicts fuel (hydrogen) and biproduct (helium)
accumulation inside the materials from which the fusion reactor is made, as well as an understanding of
the physics of helium interaction with lithium. Improved models allow future engineers and scientists to
improve designs of future power plants and test reactors, make those reactors safer and more efficient,
and generally advance the area of fusion energy science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Study of Short-Range Correlations in Nuclei Using Electro-induced Nucleon-knockout Reactions
At High Momentum-Transfer
Dr. Or Hen
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Short-Ranged Correlations (SRC) are pairs of strongly interacting nucleons whose separation is
comparable to their radii. Their overlapping quark distributions and strong interaction makes SRC pairs an
ideal system to study phenomena that bridge among low-energy nuclear structure, high-density nuclear
matter, and high-energy quark distributions. As such, their study has significant consequences for strong-
interaction physics, hadronic structure and nuclear astrophysics.
This proposal will study SRCs by measuring exclusive high-energy electron scattering reactions at the
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility. High-energy electrons will be used to breakup SRC clusters
(pairs and triplets) in various atomic nuclei. Using the CLAS12 spectrometer, the nucleons emitted in the
breakup process will be detected and the initial properties of the SRC cluster will be reconstructed. This
will allow probing the two- and three-nucleon interaction at short-distances at densities relevant for
neutron stars, to test ab-initio many-body nuclear calculations, and to explore the relation between
description of atomic nuclei using nucleons and using quarks and gluons.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Optimization and Calibration of a 4He-based Detector for Low-Mass Dark Matter
Dr. Scott Hertel, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Hadley, Massachusetts 01003-9242
Is dark matter made of particles lighter than the proton? Ambient dark matter particles from the
galactic halo will (very rarely) scatter off target materials here on earth. The challenge in testing low-mass
dark matter models is simply that the energy deposited in these dark matter scatters is correspondingly
small (eV scale and below), below the threshold of existing technologies. The goal of this work is to
advance a specific particle detector technology that shows great promise at low energies, a technology in
which superfluid helium serves as the target material. In the superfluid state, deposited energy appears
as diverse vibrational excitations collectively called `quasiparticles'. These quasiparticle excitations can
then liberate individual helium atoms from the surface of the fluid in a one-to-one process called
`quantum evaporation'. This pulse of liberated helium atoms can then be sensed via low-temperature
(mK-scale) calorimetry, such as Transition Edge Sensors. This work seeks to advance quantum
evaporation-based detector technology by boosting the amplitude of the evaporation signal, first by
enhancing the sensor sensitivity (by reducing the calorimetry temperature), and then by increasing the
quantum evaporation efficiency (by decreasing quasiparticle losses). Then the work will focus on
understanding the initial production of quasiparticles, mimicking dark matter recoils via two stages of
neutron calibration: first the development and use of a compact low-energy (24.4 keV) neutron source,
and then a novel application of epithermal (<keV) neutrons available at the Los Alamos Neutron Science
Center (LANSCE). The goal of this work is to answer the major open R&D questions of the quantum
evaporation detector technology, enabling shortly thereafter a powerful extension of dark matter
sensitivities towards lower masses.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Modeling Electronic Interactions and Multielectron Reactivity of Actinide Ions on Metal-Oxide
Surfaces: Synthesis, Characterization, and Reactivity of Actinide-Functionalized Polyoxovanadates
Dr. Ellen (Hicks) Matson, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
The fundamental investigation of the interactions of actinides with their ligand frameworks and
chemical environments is a rich area of research, with implications in catalysis, chemical separations, and
waste remediation strategies. In particular, identification of applications for transuranic elements requires
an understanding of their chemical behavior toward molecular transformations of relevance to the
production of chemical fuels. With this overarching objective as our project motivation, our research
group will develop novel scaffolds derived of wholly inorganic, metal-oxide assemblies. We anticipate that
these molecular “clusters” will be capable of supporting novel reactivity at actinide ions, taking advantage
of synergistic reactivity between transition-metal oxide moieties and the 5f-electron density unique to
heavy elements. Indeed, we have opted to investigate early actinide elements (uranium, neptunium,
plutonium) due to their tendency to exist in a variety of redox states, rendering multiple 5f-electrons
accessible for chemical reactivity and bonding. Capitalizing on the enhanced stability of actinide-oxygen
bonds, we propose that this ligand-design strategy will afford enhanced stability to the actinide ion
through robust anionic, oxide linkages, enabling the actinide center to facilitate multielectron reactions
of relevance to the production of chemical fuels. The impact of our research activities will be two-fold: (1)
We will identify new chemical transformations for actinide elements that are enabled by combining the
unique chemical behavior displayed of these elements with the well-established, rich electrochemical
properties of molecular metal-oxide scaffolds; (2) The homogeneous properties of our actinide-
functionalized metal-oxide structures will allow for thorough spectroscopic analysis of chemical reactions,
ultimately providing opportunities to understand how electron density moves between substrate,
actinide and metal-oxide metalloligand under relevant reaction conditions. Our research will set the stage
for multielectron small molecule activation with well-defined, actinide-functionalized metal-oxide
assemblies, cultivating new approaches for the mediation of chemical transformations with the 5f
electrons of actinide elements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Design and Structural Analyses of 2D Covalent Organic Frameworks
as Single-Site CO Reduction Catalysts
2
Dr. Jier Huang, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Marquette University
Milwaukee, WI 53201
The capture of CO and its simultaneously conversion to useful chemical fuels driven by solar energy
2
represents one of the best solutions to resolve growing energy concerns. Among the various strategies
that are being considered, photocatalytic CO reduction is perhaps most attractive due to its simplicity
2
and economy of the input energy source. The most critical challenge to this endeavor is the rational design
of a phototocatalytic architecture that can effectively couple a given photosensitizer with an appropriate
catalyst, thereby enabling efficient photosensitization of a multi-electron reduction catalysis. The
objectives of this research are to address this challenge using an interdisciplinary approach that combines
innovative material design and synthesis, fundamental mechanistic studies, and photocatalytic
performance evaluation. These goals will be accomplished by 1) constructing a unique set of hybrid
covalent organic framework (COF) photocatalysts with an effective photoactive organic building block as
photosensitizer and a precisely incorporated CO reduction molecular catalyst; 2) examining the excited
2
state and charge separation dynamics of these photocatalysts using a set of complementary time resolved
spectroscopy to unravel the key factors that control their function as photocatalysts; and 3) investigating
the photocatalytic performance, selectivity and catalytic pathways, and correlating them with
photophysical properties to determine the structure-function relationship of these hybrid COF catalysts.
This research will address current shortcomings of semiconductor- and molecular-based photocatalytic
systems that suffer from inefficient light harvesting and charge separation and poor adsorption and
activation of reactants. In turn, this research will contribute toward the development of novel
photocatalytic systems for CO reduction to generate renewable chemical fuels using sunlight as the only
2
energy input.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Data Structure Alchemy
Dr. Stratos Idreos, Associate Professor
Harvard J. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
What do analytics, machine learning, data science, and big data systems have in common? What
is the major common component for astronomy, biology, neuroscience, and all other data-driven and
computational sciences? Data structures. A data structure defines how data is physically stored. For all
algorithms that deal with data across all applications in businesses and sciences, their design starts by
defining a data structure that ideally minimizes computation and data movement. The fundamental
problem is that there is no universally perfect data structure, and as such, we need to design new data
structures as new data, applications, and hardware emerge. For scientific data-driven fields without
computer science expertise, these low-level designs are extremely hard or expensive to make. For
established tech companies and data-driven startups, the complexity leads to a slow design process and
has severe cost side-effects. Furthermore, in today's cloud-based world, even slightly sub-optimal designs
translate to a massive loss in energy utilization for the cloud provider and cloud expenses for the
application. We propose a radical new way to the decades-old problem of data structure design based on
first principles and AI. We set out to discover the first principles of data structure design and develop
learning algorithms to search through the astronomically large design space they form. Effectively, the
principles and their structure form a ``grammar'' that describes all existing data structures and their
expected behavior in a principled way, as well as a massive number of designs that have not been invented
yet. Thus, Data Structure Alchemy has the potential to accelerate research, entrepreneurship as well as
improve computer science education. Our work focuses on three data storage models which are pervasive
in everyday life, in businesses, sciences, and education: key-value structures, graph structures, and
images.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Searches for New Long-Lived Particles and Upgrades to the ATLAS Inner Detector
Dr. Laura Jeanty, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Oregon
Eugene, Oregon 97403
Despite the enormous success of the Standard Model of particle physics in describing the nature of
matter at small scales and in explaining the fundamental interactions of elementary particles in our
universe, key questions still remain unanswered: What is the nature of dark matter? Is there a universal
symmetry that unites all three of the forces described by the Standard Model and can such a symmetry
be extended to include gravity? What sets the scale of the observed Higgs boson mass? New elementary
particles with measurably long lifetimes are predicted by many theoretical models that seek to answer
these questions. This research program targets the discovery of long-lived particles produced via
electroweak processes by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Organization for Nuclear
Research (CERN) in Switzerland. Experimental signatures of such long-lived particles are predicted in
compelling models for dark matter and can be integral to the explanation for the observed Higgs mass.
The study plans to apply innovative analysis techniques to the data collected by the ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC
ApparatuS) experiment at the LHC and to develop new trigger algorithms to improve the extraction of
signatures of long-lived particles. Further, to ensure the sensitivity of ATLAS to new physics processes for
the duration of the planned higher luminosity era of the LHC, the program includes the development of
critical components of the new readout system of the ATLAS Inner Tracker upgrade. As a result, this work
will not only illuminate the most promising hiding place of weak-scale solutions to many of the remaining
mysteries of particle physics, but will also advance the instruments used in the searches.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Emergent Properties of Magnons Coupled to Microwave Photons
Dr. M. Benjamin Jungfleisch, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716
Studying the emergent properties of hybrid quantum material platforms holds the promise to
advance quantum technologies, and to revolutionize our understanding of controlling quantum
mechanical interactions. A new direction emerged in recent years when it was realized that magnons, the
elementary quanta of spin waves, could be used as one building block in the quantum toolbox.
Determining the specific mechanisms for the generation and control of hybrid quasiparticles based on
magnons could potentially lead to the ability to engineer new materials for quantum coherent processing
and quantum computers. The goal of this research is to achieve precise control of light-matter interaction
in magnetic hybrid systems and nanostructures, where the light part is carried by microwave photons,
and the matter component is carried by magnons in engineered magnetic metamaterials. This research
will implement new measurement techniques and undertake systematic studies of new material systems
for efficient control of magnon-photon coupling. The underlying mechanisms of both the interaction of
magnons with photons, and magnons with phonons will be determined, as these interactions are essential
for utilizing magnons as coherent information transduction platform between carriers. This project
explores the mechanism by which nonuniform magnons interact with photons in the strong coupling
regime, determines the spatial distribution of the hybrid excitations, and identifies how to dynamically
and spatially control the interaction. It is therefore essential to broaden the range of material platforms,
as well as the measurement techniques that can be applied to understand the mechanisms of magnon-
photon coupling. Specific goals include: (1) Exploring the dispersion and collective properties of the
magnon-polaritons in new materials; (2) Realizing magnonic hybrids with non-zero wavevector and
effectively controlling magnon-polariton properties through an engineered magnonic/phononic band
structure; and (3) Determining the mechanisms by which spin-transport phenomena interact with
electromagnetic fields in the strong coupling regime. Overall, this research will result in a wealth of new
knowledge about the physics of magnonic hybrid systems and the control of their emergent properties.
The activities of this project are expected to impact the fundamental understanding of magnon-
polaritons, and lay the foundation to create novel spintronic devices, which could be used in quantum
information science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences
and the DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Tunable Energy Landscape, Non-Trivial Band Topology, and Electric Field Driven Phenomena in Novel
Quantum Materials as Probed by Localized Photoemission Spectroscopy
Dr. Jyoti Katoch, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials possess many unique properties that conventional
three-dimensional systems do not. 2D materials can be a flexible component in the design of condensed
matter 3D systems through the stacking of 2D parts, layer-by-layer. The result is called a van der Waals
(vdW) hetero-structure, formed much like “Legos” are used to build different toy objects. By adjusting the
twist angle between the constituent layers, vdW hetero-structures can be made to have different complex
phases of matter and novel properties, including metal to insulator transitions, superconductivity, bound
excited electron states, and topological states. Furthermore, because they consist mainly of surface
atoms, the unique physical properties of thin layered materials are easily affected by external surface
perturbations. This can be detrimental to their intrinsic ground state properties and presents a
fundamental challenge to using 2D materials for future technological applications. This work seeks to fully
understand the role of extrinsic perturbations (supporting substrate interactions, adsorbed atom impurity
defects, and applied electric field) on the intrinsic properties of 2D materials. The knowledge will help
design ways to protect against defects but will also lead to methods to control the material’s properties
by modifying their environment in specific ways.
The properties of a material are dictated by its electronic structure (the distribution of electrons in
energy and momentum.) Therefore, this research will directly probe with spatially resolved spectroscopy
the electronic band structure of 2D quantum materials and their hetero-structures. The work involves
state-of-the-art angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy with nanoscale spatial resolution (nano-
ARPES) at the Advanced Light Source (ALS). The planned research will develop a capability to perform
nano-ARPES measurements under non-equilibrium conditions, when an external lateral electric field is
applied to a 2D system. This type of research is a crucial step towards the eventual development of 2D
materials for future technological applications in electronics, opto-electronics, photonics, and spintronic
devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Data-Driven Optimization under Uncertainty: Parallel Algorithms and Solver
Dr. Kibaek Kim, Assistant Computational Mathematician
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Lemont, IL 60439
The U.S. electric grid systems are increasingly incorporating smart grid sensors, energy storage,
microgrids, and distributed energy resources such as solar photovoltaic panels. The proposed research in
optimization under uncertainty will address the technical challenges in modeling the design and control
of cyber-physical systems. Conventional approaches make the restrictive assumption that the underlying
probability distribution of uncertain model parameters is known. The proposed research formulates this
challenge as a distributionally robust multistage stochastic optimization (DRMSO) problem that makes
multistage decisions that account for the uncertainty from unknown distributions. High-performance
algorithms will be developed for solving such problems. Adaptive decomposition methods for the
algorithms will exploit their mathematical and statistical structure for efficient use on emerging computer
architectures. The proposed research will improve reliability and resilience in the design and operation of
the U.S. electric grid, edge computing networks, and other cyber-physical systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Joint Analyses of Lensing, Clustering, and Galaxy Clusters with DES and LSST
Dr. Elisabeth Krause, Assistant Professor
Astronomy Department
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona 85721-0158
The accelerated expansion of the Universe is the most surprising cosmological discovery in decades,
and has inspired a generation of ambitious surveys to determine the fundamental nature of the
acceleration, such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). The most stringent constraints on cosmic
acceleration, or dark energy, from these surveys will come from the joint analysis of different cosmological
probes and incorporate synergies across surveys and wavelengths.
This Early Career research program will develop such a combined-probes analysis program to jointly
analyze galaxy clustering, weak lensing, and the abundance of galaxy clusters in Year 1 (Y1) data from the
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), which will deliver an unprecedented combination of data quality
and size. This leap in statistical constraining power must be matched by a similarly unprecedented control
of systematic uncertainties. Hence the proposed LSST-Y1 analysis program will be developed on
increasingly complex data sets from the Dark Energy Survey (DES) and LSST precursor data.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Abiotic and Biotic Controls on Chemical Weathering Rates and Solute Generation
Dr. Isaac J. Larsen, Assistant Professor
Department of Geosciences
University of Massachusetts – Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
Precipitation falling on mountainous watersheds is exposed to surface and subsurface processing,
such as chemical weathering, before eventually leaving as streamflow. In turn, this processing is governed
by a variety of abiotic and biotic interactions involving, e.g., the type of rock that governs geomorphology
and mineralization and the type of vegetation that can generate acidity. The proposed work will focus on
the role of vegetation as a means to influence water chemistry and quality. By employing a multi-scale
approach, the project will address the following questions: 1) Does landscape-scale heterogeneity in
vegetation, climate, and geology impart unique, spatially-variable signatures on soil production and
chemical weathering rates? 2) What roles do the legacies of Pleistocene glaciation and Holocene
geomorphic processes play in determining modern-day solute concentrations in surface waters? 3) Are
physical erosion and chemical weathering rates linked at the watershed scale, and can these rates be
predicted from watershed characteristics? These questions will be addressed in the physical and
ecological setting of the East River watershed near Crested Butte, Colorado.
The proposed technical approach will assess controls on weathering and solute generation at the soil
profile, landform, and watershed scales. At the soil profile scale, soil production and chemical weathering
rates will be quantified with cosmogenic nuclides and geochemical mass balance at sites that span biotic,
climatic, and geologic gradients in order to isolate the key drivers of chemical weathering. At the landform
scale, solute concentrations in surface waters will be used to assess whether surficial deposits generated
by different geomorphic processes impart unique weathering signatures. At the watershed-scale,
cosmogenic nuclides will be used to measure erosion rates. A series of reactive transport models will be
constructed to place the field-based findings into a framework for making predictions regarding the roles
that vegetation, climate, and geomorphology play in solute generation. The proposed research
complements ongoing BER investments at the LBNL Watershed Science SFA Science Focus Area.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Understanding and Controlling Photoexcited Molecules in Complex Environments
Dr. David T. Limmer, Assistant Professor
Division of Chemistry
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 97410
Predicting the outcome of a chemical reactions driven by light is complicated by factors outside the
scope of traditional theoretical chemistry. On such small scales, fluctuations of the environment render
outcomes random, quantum mechanics blur the separation between nuclear and electronic motion, and
the accompanying ultrafast relaxation renders typical assumptions of equilibrium inappropriate. By
combining contemporary ideas from quantum information and nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, this
research aims to develop a set of theoretical and computational tools to unravel the photoexcited
dynamics of small molecules in the condensed phase, and learn how to control their outcomes. The
algorithmic and theoretical advances will be generally applicable to challenging questions across the
physical sciences, and provide design principles for nanoscale materials for energy storage and
generation, molecular machines and motors, and beyond.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Elucidating the Nature of Chiral and Topological Phonons in Materials for Energy Technologies
Dr. Lucas Lindsay, Research Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The control of heat is critical to overcoming challenges in a variety of energy applications where heat
loss or buildup can result in poor performance, including electronics, vehicles, energy storage, information
technologies, and even nuclear reactors. This research will explore atomic vibrations called “phonons” as
avenues for optimizing heat flow so that materials can be tailor-made for transformative energy
technologies. Because heat activity happens on the atomic level, innovative approaches will need to fine-
tune materials’ atomic properties, for example, to keep electronics cool or to make batteries more
efficient. Vibrating atoms can have unique arrangements, including “chiral” or mirrored structures, in the
same way that a right and left hand are compatible pairs but not identical to one another. Making a proper
handshake or other fine adjustments opens possibilities to tune materials for specific properties. This
research will use cutting-edge theoretical techniques and artificial intelligence to investigate materials’
tunability, specifically to enhance thermal conductivity. As thermal processes are critical to energy
production and use, the outcome of this work will provide fundamental insights into developing novel
energy materials to advance our nation’s energy technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Elucidating the Mechanistic Determinants of Flavin-Based Electron Bifurcation
Dr. Cara Lubner, Chemist
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
Golden, CO 80401
Industrial catalysts are employed to drive a number of challenging chemical reactions resulting in
value-added products such as ammonia and methanol; the use of which has greatly altered civilization.
However, as the demand for more and new value-added products (such as fuels, drugs and small
molecules) increases, critical advances in design of synthetic catalysts capable of driving energetically
demanding reactions will become even more necessary. Biological enzymes serve as a point of inspiration
for this because they are able to perform a variety of difficult reactions with high selectivity, fidelity and
efficiency. This project investigates a unique type of enzyme capable of separating an electron pair into
individual low-energy and high-energy electrons and bifurcating them along spatially distinct paths to
selectively catalyze the production of two products, one of which is more reduced than the starting
material. The goal of this project is to elucidate the physical features responsible for the strict temporal,
spatial and energetic control over electrons. To achieve this, a suite of steady state and ultrafast
biophysical techniques are employed to specifically probe the properties of the electron bifurcating site
and the initial mechanistic events. This information is integral to understanding how energy is controlled
and manipulated in complex biological systems; the insights of which will lead to design principles that
accelerate the development of transformative energy technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Scalable Architectures for Hybrid Quantum/Classical Networking
Dr. Joseph M. Lukens, Senior Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN, 37831
The main objective of this project is to research and develop advanced quantum communication
networking concepts and subsystems to support the emerging Quantum Information Sciences (QI)
ecosystems. Advances in quantum communication networks are critical to harnessing the full potential of
the new quantum information science paradigm, especially for distributed quantum information
processing such as quantum sensing, distributed quantum computing, quantum key distribution, and
quantum cloud computing that on transmitting quantum sate information. Unlike the current digital
networks, quantum networks are governed by strict laws of quantum mechanics such as no-cloning,
superposition, and entanglement that make the development of practical quantum network challenging.
However, if successfully developed, it will usher a new era in telecommunications. It will among other
capabilities bring concepts such as teleportation and unbreakable network security once considered
“science fiction” within practical reach.
In this project, we propose to overcome the above technical challenges by researching, developing,
and testing a new generation of photonic quantum communication network technologies (hardware,
software, and protocols) that exploit the dual the nature of light (particle and wave) to transmit quantum
information over long distances. The distinguishing feature of the proposed effort is the focus on quantum
networks designed to leveraged existing optical network technologies, especially the currently deployed
telecommunication optical fiber systems. Upon successful completion, we hope to deliver and test a
hybrid classical/quantum network architectures, protocols, and basic hardware and software components
that will have the potential for accelerating the developing what could potentially become the backbone
of a future Quantum Internet existing coexisting in the current telecommunication fiber systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
The Next Revolution in Neutrino Physics
Dr. Pedro Machado, Associate Scientist
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, Illinois 60510
The existence of neutrino masses, inferred from neutrino oscillation measurements, is one of the few
cogent evidences of physics beyond the standard model. The forthcoming US experimental neutrino
program largely relies on liquid argon time projection chambers (LArTPCs) to further deepen our
knowledge of the neutrino sector. LArTPCs can be thought of as modern bubble chambers, outstandingly
identifying and reconstructing tracks of charged particles produced by neutrino events. With the goal of
fully exploiting the outcomes of the US experimental neutrino program, this research plan is based upon
three cornerstones. First, in-depth, systematic studies of several standard and beyond the standard
physics scenarios will be performed. This includes an unprecedented study of low energy atmospheric
neutrinos, uniquely enabled by the LArTPC technology. Second, an exploration of novel ideas will be
pursued with the intent of connecting open questions of physics to the neutrino sector, such as the origin
of neutrino masses and dark matter, and flavor physics models at low scales. Finally, to maximize the
impact on the field, the outcomes of this project will be implemented in automated tools and will be made
available publicly, so they can readily be used by the broad theory and experimental communities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Realization of a Quantum Slide Rule for 1+1 Dimensional Quantum Field Theories
Using Josephson Junction Superconducting Circuits
Dr. Vladimir Manucharyan, Assistant Professor
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
An important milestone on the way to universal quantum computing is producing a device capable
of solving a specific useful quantum problem. Such a specialized computing device can be viewed as a
quantum version of a slide rule in the sense that it will produce a very specific set of otherwise unavailable
quantum calculations, which can be later applied to a larger class of more challenging problems. Our
quantum slide rule will consist of a high-impedance superconducting transmission line coupled to an
artificial atom. This engineered quantum system can controllably mimic the dynamics of a generic one-
dimensional system of interacting fundamental particles. The specific problems our quantum slide rule
will solve are profoundly linked to the topics in conformal quantum field theories of high-energy physics
and to the quantum impurity problems of condensed-matter physics, both of which play a foundational
role in modern theoretical physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Control of Bright Electron Beams at Small Spatiotemporal Scales
for Probing Materials Far from Equilibrium
Dr. Jared Maxson, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
Driving atomic vibrations with short, intense light pulses is an exciting route to unlock new material
phases that are not available in static equilibrium. For example, light-driven vibrational modes have been
shown to induce ultrafast changes in atomic lattice symmetry, or dramatic changes in electrical
conductivity. These phenomena employ vibrational modes with extremely short periods (hundreds of
femtoseconds and below), spectral signatures well below one electron volt, and potentially nanometer
spatial scales. This leads to a challenging set of requirements for any time-resolved structural probe to be
able to observe the full evolution of light-driven atomic vibrational modes. This research seeks to develop
a suite of electron optical techniques to deliver high-quality electron beams tunable between each of
these resolution extremes in time-resolved electron scattering experiments. This work will employ a new
class of high-brightness photoelectron source in conjunction with precision electron spectrometer optics
to enable multiple new measurement modalities, including: (1) ultrafast electron diffraction with time of
arrival measurements for sub-phonon period temporal resolution, and (2) ultrafast time-resolved
vibrational spectroscopy with small probe beam sizes. These techniques have the potential to unlock the
observation of a wide swath of light-driven atomic dynamics and can be accomplished with compact,
meter-scale electron scattering beamlines.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
The Physics of Micro-Pinches
Dr. Ryan McBride, Associate Professor
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
By funneling a large electrical current through a very small conduction channel (a very thin wire, for
example), an enormous magnetic field can be generated. This magnetic field encloses the wire and can
exert an enormous inward pressure on the wire. Using a modest-sized current generator (i.e., a generator
about the size of a small car), a solid metal wire can be compressed and heated to a pressure exceeding
one billion atmospheres. This project will use this compression technique to produce and study extremely
high-pressure states of matter in a modest laboratory setting. Understanding these states of matter, and
how to control them, will impact programs in national defense, energy, and basic science, with
applications in nuclear fusion, radiation science, material properties, and laboratory astrophysics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Systems metabolic Engineering of Novosphingobium aromaticivorans for Lignin Valorization
Dr. Josh Michener, Scientist
Biosciences Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37830
In a typical biorefinery, sugars derived from plant material (or biomass) are fermented to fuels by
microorganisms. However, a substantial fraction of the plant biomass that contains a polymer called lignin
cannot be easily degraded and is instead burned for heat. Lignin could be converted into value-added
bioproducts, offering a potential source of additional revenue to improve the economics of biofuel
production. Chemical conversion of lignin is challenging, but specialized bacteria with the necessary
biochemical capabilities could potentially produce desired compounds from different mixtures of lignin-
rich mixtures. Although bacteria that are suited for lignin conversion are known, they have not been
extensively studied or manipulated. This project will characterize the biochemical pathways for
assimilation of lignin-derived compounds in a bacterium that can metabolize a wide range of such
compounds. New pathways will then be engineered into this bacterium to convert depolymerized lignin
into valuable bioproducts. To achieve this goal, a novel genetic method will be used to build a predictive
systems biology model and identify additional genetic targets for further metabolic optimization. These
efforts will result in new methods to predictively model and engineer a promising microbe for lignin
valorization that can ultimately be applied to a wide range of emerging microorganisms relevant for BER’s
mission in sustainable bioenergy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
I/O Workload Characterization for Performance and Portability
Dr. Kathryn Mohror, Data Analysis Group Leader
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94551
Currently, to achieve high I/O (input/output) performance, developers must go to great lengths to
tailor their I/O approach to fit the software and storage architecture for each supercomputer. As a rule,
storage system middleware manages I/O requests blindly, in that all bytes are treated with the same
priority and in the same fashion. However, special treatment of classes of I/O (e.g., checkpoint files used
for restarting in the event of failure) has resulted in orders of magnitude improvement in I/O performance.
This project will improve I/O performance and user experience in the face of increasingly complex high
performance computing (HPC) storage hierarchies. Building upon the successes of special treatment of
I/O classes, capabilities will be developed for all types of I/O so that applications will be able to tag I/O
operations with request types that reflect the intended usage of the data, e.g., checkpointing, as well as
with high-level quality of service (QoS) requirements. The key benefit of this work will be the abstraction
of the details of any particular storage system, allowing users to access high performance I/O on
supercomputers more easily. Users will only need to know the I/O characteristics of their applications,
which will result in more portable code, and system software will dynamically schedule I/O operations on
potentially complex hierarchical storage systems, taking into account the individual needs of particular
I/O requests and storage system resource capabilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Developing the Surface Engineering Basis for Next-Generation SRF Accelerators
Dr. Ari Palczewski
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
Newport News, VA 23606
Since 2012, expectations of the potential performance of niobium for superconducting
radiofrequency (SRF) accelerator applications (SRF cavities) have been dramatically evolving. The
discovery that tailored interstitial doping of the radio frequency (RF) surface yields dramatically reduced
losses has been transformative (similar to initial advancements in silicon manufacturing). In the case of
high-temperature nitrogen doping (HTND); low pressure (~20 mTorr) nitrogen is added at 800°C after a
hydrogen de-gassing phase in a vacuum furnace. The nitrogen addition creates a lossy nitride crystal phase
on the surface (removed through electro-chemistry) and a performance-enhanced nitrided niobium phase
below (revealed after electro-chemistry). We seek to develop a predictive model of HTND to transition
away from the traditional guess and check method of doping performance. Development of a predictive
and tunable model of doping requires a data set built on Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) for surface
morphology and Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS) for interstitial doping percent. RF cavity tests
provide efficiency, maximum performance, and superconducting properties on the doping. The feedback
loop provided by the dataset will be used to create a multi-variable predictive mathematical model
general enough for use in any application. Unlike previous simplified models, the new model needs to
contain the nitride crystal seeding time and material dependencies, time-dependent nitride crystal
morphology with/without nitrogen and diffusion coefficients depending crystal structure. Upon
completion, this program should allow the modeling and demonstration of specific cavity treatment
protocols tailored to any next-generation accelerator, likely making new types of applications
economically viable. An even more dramatic expansion of opportunities will open up when HTND
technology that simultaneously supports high mid-field Q (high efficiency) and very high gradients
0
(maximum performance) is realized. The new predictive model will be able to calculate the correct doping
parameters in advance to achieve such performance.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Ultrasonic Determination of Electron Viscosity and Hydrodynamics in Metals
Dr. Brad Ramshaw, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
The flow of electricity is often taught in analogy to the flow of water: electrical current is analogous
to the rate of flow, voltage is analogous to pressure, and a constriction in a pipe is analogous to a resistor
in a circuit. This analogy is helpful when trying to build intuition about simple electrical circuits, but like
any analogy it can be misleading. In particular, the flow of water is described by mathematics called
“hydrodynamics” – this leads to turbulence, vortices, shear drag, and other effects seen while watching a
raging river or a boat propeller. Electricity behaves very differently—electrons constantly bounce off of
the defects and impurities that are present in all metals, leading to “diffusive” behavior that looks more
like a Plinko-game than a flowing river. Recent experiments, however, have shown that this may not
always be the case. When metals are made extremely pure, or when circuits are built at the nano-scale,
“hydrodynamic” effects may be important for the flow of electricity. A crucial parameter is the electron
viscosity—the high viscosity of honey makes it flow slowly, while the low viscosity of water makes it more
fluid. Electron viscosity is very difficult to measure, but this project is developing a new experiment based
on ultra-high-frequency ultrasound that can measure electron viscosity in a very direct way. Knowing the
electron viscosity will allow for the design of nano-scale electronics using a new generation of ultra-clean
metals, and will allow the testing of fundamental quantum mechanical ideas that relate electron viscosity
to high-temperature superconductivity.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Towards Scalable Precision Tuning of Numerical Software
Dr. Cindy Rubio Gonzalez, Assistant Professor
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95618
Floating point is a widely used representation that approximates real numbers. A large variety of
applications, including extreme-scale scientific applications, depend on floating point. By nature, floating
point introduces imprecision in numerical calculations. Using the highest available precision for floating-
point numbers could reduce numerical error. However, this practice reduces application performance.
Because both reliability and performance are critical, this proposal will develop techniques to assist
programmers in exploring the trade-off between precision and performance with an emphasis on
handling large, long-running scientific applications. In particular, this proposal focuses on (1) developing
novel program-analysis and machine-learning techniques for scalable floating-point precision tuning to
improve program performance, (2) developing testing techniques to generate inputs for robust precision
tuning, and (3) creating a benchmark to enable the evaluation of precision-tuning tools on large, real
applications. The proposed research advances the state of the art in precision tuning and testing of
numerical software. Our techniques will have a direct impact in, and foster collaboration with, Computer
Science research areas such as High Performance Computing and Machine Learning, as well as other
research fields that rely on floating-point arithmetic. The tools developed and data produced as part of
this proposal will be made publicly available under a BSD license.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
The Synthesis of Metal Superhydrides Through Extreme Temperature/Pressure Conditions:
Towards Room Temperature Superconductivity
Dr. Ashkan Salamat, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Nevada
Las Vegas, NV 89154
The discovery of metal superhydrides – extremely hydrogen-rich materials – may hold the key to
room-temperature superconductivity. Limitations with storing energy produced from renewable sources
can be overcome by the introduction of superconducting materials to the transmission grid, providing an
efficient means of storing and recovering energy on demand, as well as a method for transferring energy
over long distances. Superhydrides often require extreme conditions to synthesize – up to millions of
atmospheres in pressure – making sample sizes small, and their chemical properties difficult to analyze.
This work investigates the possibility of readily synthesizing metal (Y, Tc, Sn, La) superhydrides at extreme
pressures, and develops experimental techniques to probe the precise makeup of these materials. These
studies provide the backbone for theoretical understanding of their chemical bonding, crucial for
developing strategies for their recovery at ambient conditions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences
and the DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Enhancing the Discovery Potential of the nEXO Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay Experiment
Dr. Richard Saldanha
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
The particle nature of neutrinos is one of the most interesting open questions in physics today.
Neutrinos have the unique possibility of being fundamental Majorana particles, i.e., single particles
representing both matter and antimatter states. Discovering that neutrinos are Majorana particles would
directly establish physics beyond the current Standard Model and have an immense impact on our
understanding of particle physics. The most promising approach to experimentally establishing the
Majorana nature of neutrinos is to search for neutrinoless double beta decay, an extremely rare nuclear
process. The primary experimental challenge for such a search is building a detector that is sensitive to
this process above all other naturally occurring radioactive backgrounds. The next-generation Enriched
Xenon Observatory (nEXO) experiment aims to search for the neutrinoless double beta decay of xenon-
136. The projected sensitivity of nEXO will uncover a large region of unexplored parameter space opening
up the possibility of the first detection of neutrinoless double beta decay. This research will develop a
comprehensive program to enhance the discovery potential of the experiment by reducing the dominant
radioactive backgrounds through two complementary approaches. The first is the development of
detector components with extremely low radioactivity levels, while the second involves optimizing the
design of the experiment to maximize the rejection of residual backgrounds. These methods are both
critical, as they not only significantly increase the sensitivity of the experiment, but also increase the
confidence by which a discovery claim could be made.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Elucidating Aromatic Catabolic Pathways in White-Rot Fungi during Lignin Decay
Dr. Davinia Salvachúa Rodríguez, Scientist
National Bioenergy Center
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Golden, CO 80401
Lignin is a heterogeneous polymer found in the cell walls of terrestrial plants and accounts for 30%
of the organic carbon in the biosphere. White-rot fungi are undoubtedly the most efficient lignin-
degrading organisms in Nature and are thus responsible for a substantial amount of carbon turnover on
Earth. Lignin conversion to carbon dioxide and water by these organisms has been studied for decades
and is very well accepted. However, the biochemical pathways that allow white-rot fungi to deconstruct
and further metabolize lignin remain largely unknown. Indeed, it is still a matter of controversy whether
or not these organisms utilize lignin degradation products as a carbon and/or energy source. Furthermore,
the chemical units that constitute lignin could be used as precursors of valuable compounds. However,
due to its complex nature and the difficulty to break it down into smaller components, lignin is an
undervalued substrate for biorefineries that use plant biomass to produce biofuels. This research will
apply systems biology and computational modeling approaches to elucidate the metabolic pathways for
lignin conversion in white-rot fungi and understand the biological roles of lignin degradation. The
knowledge gained through this work will serve as a foundation to employ white-rot fungi in lignin
bioconversion into value added bioproducts, advancing towards a sustainable plant-based bioeconomy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Learning to Learn: Designing Novel Neuromorphic Algorithms with Machine Learning
Dr. Catherine Schuman, Research Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Scientific research generates data significantly faster than can be analyzed with today’s computing
power, thereby creating a need for energy efficient, intelligent computing. An emerging technology called
neuromorphic computing shows promise in satisfying this need. For the US Department of Energy, this
breakthrough computing paradigm will be necessary in future computing systems to continue scientific
discoveries and development. A significant research challenge in applying neuromorphic computing to
scientific research is defining the learning approaches that will fully realize the real-time continuous
learning capabilities of neuromorphic computers. To address this challenge, I will use machine learning
with existing high-performance computing (HPC) to automatically create new learning algorithms that will
enable unsupervised or semi-supervised real-time continuous learning for neuromorphic systems.
Specifically, I will: (1) develop HPC-based neuromorphic hardware simulators that will accelerate the study
and understanding of neuromorphic hardware, (2) develop an HPC-based algorithm evaluation
framework for existing learning methods for neuromorphic systems in order to investigate the capabilities
of these methods, and (3) develop new learning methods for neuromorphic systems by utilizing HPC and
machine learning methods. The goal of this work is to provide a path forward for using neuromorphic
computers for real-time adaptive machine learning-based analysis of scientific data by using machine
learning approaches on HPC to develop new neuromorphic learning approaches.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Low-Dimensional Manifold Learning for Uncertainty Quantification
in Complex Multi-Scale Stochastic Systems
Dr. Michael D. Shields, Assistant Professor
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
Understanding the properties and behavior of complex materials often requires the development of
computational models for the system at multiple scales. The development of fracture and deformation
models for amorphous solids (polymers, gels, glasses) and ductile metals are of particular interest. One
major source of modeling challenges involves efficient multi-scale representation and
information transfer between models at atomistic, microstructural and structural length-scales. These
difficulties are compounded by the high-dimensionality, nonlinearity, and myriad uncertainties that arise
in determining the appropriate form and parameter values for the sub-models. The proposed research
develops active learning and so-called dimension hyper-reduction methods to enable uncertainty
quantification for these complex systems. This advanced modeling approach is likely to be more realistic
and computationally manageable than conventional methods. Research developments will also lead to
advanced software solutions such as the UQpy open-source Python toolbox for large-scale uncertainty
quantification in multiscale stochastic systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Genetic Tools to Optimize Lignocellulose Conversion in Anaerobic Fungi
and Interrogate Their Genomes
Dr. Kevin Solomon, Assistant Professor
Department of Agricultural & Biological Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Specialized microbes can convert renewable plant material into biofuels and other bioproducts.
However, the microbes currently used for industrial biofuel production cannot break down the plant cell
wall material (or plant biomass) into its component sugars unless it is previously partially broken apart
with heat and chemicals. Anaerobic fungi that live in the guts of animals that eat plants have the capacity
to degrade plant biomass more efficiently than industrial microorganisms and without the need for prior
treatment. In spite of the natural advantages of these fungi, they are not used industrially because no
genetic tools are available to identify and manipulate the enzymes that constitute the biochemical
machinery responsible for their biomass degradation capabilities. This project will develop and leverage
high resolution -omics resources to better understand the physiology of anaerobic fungi using systems
and synthetic biology approaches. Novel genetic and epigenetic tools will be designed to engineer new
strains of anaerobic fungi with improved biomass degradation capacity. In parallel, cell-free strategies will
be applied to rapidly characterize fungal proteins and identify improved enzyme functions. With these
approaches it will be possible to identify the genetic machinery involved in the breakdown of
lignocellulosic plant biomass in these fungi and provide systems-level insight into the genomic basis of
biomass deconstruction. Ultimately, this project will help establish design principles to engineer new
fungal strains for lignocellulose deconstruction, while creating enabling genetic tools for metabolic
engineering of anaerobic fungi. Planned experiments will leverage DOE genomics, molecular, and
computational analysis resources at the Joint Genome Institute, the Environmental Molecular Sciences
Laboratory, and the Systems Biology Knowledgebase. The knowledge gained from this project will enable
predictive biology and genome engineering in anaerobic fungi, advancing BER’s mission in the
development of sustainable bioenergy resources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Tagging Radon Daughter Backgrounds in a Crystalline Xenon TPC:
A Solid Future for the LZ Dark Matter Search Experiment
Dr. Peter Sorensen, Divisional Fellow
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, California 94720
What is the particle nature of the dark matter in the universe? A new generation of dark matter direct
detection experiments, including the liquid xenon LZ detector, will soon begin operations in an attempt
to answer this question. By looking for interactions between theoretically well-motivated weakly
interacting massive (dark matter) particles (WIMPs) and the xenon atoms in its (liquid) target mass, LZ will
search a significant new region of dark matter parameter space. Yet their search is likely going to be
limited by background events resulting from radioactive decays of radon contaminants. Whatever the
experimental outcome – improved exclusion limits, a few tantalizing candidate events, or a clear dark
matter signal detection – there will be strong motivation to improve sensitivity until the experiment
reaches the search limit resulting from irreducible neutrino-xenon interactions that are indistinguishable
from dark matter induced signals. This research project will develop a dark matter search detector using
crystalline (as opposed to liquid) xenon, which offers two major instrumental advantages: mitigation of
radon diffusion into the crystalline xenon target, and tagging of any radon radioactive decay products that
grew into the crystal during its formation. These advances are uniquely available in the crystalline xenon
state. If successful, this work will provide a critical new technology and a potential upgrade path for the
LZ experiment. Such an upgrade would enable exploration of the final order of magnitude of WIMP dark
matter parameter space, down to the neutrino-induced search limit.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Multi-Watershed Perturbation-Response Traits Derived Through Ecological Theory
Dr. James Stegen, Earth Scientist
Biological Sciences Division
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
A major challenge for prediction of watershed systems is understanding how perturbations (e.g.,
hydrologic disturbances) influence intense biogeochemical activity in space (hot spots) or time (hot
moments). Most studies of hot spot/moments have focused on single sites, which leads to scientific
discovery that is not necessarily transferrable across watersheds. To address this limitation, this study will
use field infrastructure in >60 watershed field sites across the United States and analyses provided by the
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory user facility. Resulting data will be used to test numerical
modeling predictions of mechanistic connections between dissolved organic matter (DOM) chemistry and
biogeochemical control point influence (CPI). The CPI is the contribution of elevated biogeochemical rates
in space or time to the net aggregated biogeochemical rate within a defined system. CPI quantification
will be combined with an innovative application of ecological theory to highly-resolved molecular
characterization of DOM that allows DOM chemistry to be summarized as a biogeochemically-relevant
trait. Experimentation across broadly distributed watersheds combined with detailed molecular analysis
will reveal general, transferrable principles that will be used to create a trait-based framework capable of
predicting impacts of perturbations on biogeochemical CPIs across watersheds. This trait-based
framework can be further integrated with advanced numerical models to link dynamic watershed
processes to DOM chemistry and CPIs. Ultimately, the science conducted by this project will improve
predictive capabilities from local to watershed to Earth-system scales.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Development and Testing of Reduced Models of the Edge Radial Electric Field
Dr. Timothy Stoltzfus-Dueck, Theoretical Plasma Physicist
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
Princeton, NJ 08543
Magnetic-confinement fusion in tokamaks offers the promise of virtually limitless energy with no
carbon-dioxide emissions. To achieve this, a plasma that is several times hotter than the center of the sun
must be confined inside a toroidal metal vessel that measures only meters in minor radius. Economical
energy generation requires excellent confinement, minimizing the turbulent energy losses. Overall device
performance depends strongly on the edge region, a thin layer between the hot core and the relatively
cold scrape-off layer, where the plasma contacts the vessel wall. In the edge, extremely steep gradients
of plasma temperature can be achieved, due in part to instability and turbulence suppression by the edge
radial electric field E
r
and its shear. Prediction and control of edge E
r
requires a first-principles
understanding of the underlying physics. The science is challenging because many physical effects interact
and compete with each other. For example, the momentum fluxes and torques due to turbulence, non-
axisymmetric magnetic perturbations, and neutral atoms are inter-related, but their interaction is not
understood. Also, the drift orbits of ions modulate the turbulent and collisional fluxes in the edge, as well
as the effects of neutrals that ionize in the edge. The effects of these mechanisms will be analytically
calculated using a novel, experimentally validated modulated-transport formalism. Using numerical
diagnostics based on these results, massively parallel numerical simulations will quantitatively evaluate
these terms. The theoretical results will be validated through comparison with experimental data from
the NSTX, NSTX-U, and DIII-D tokamaks. Taken together, these investigations will uncover new insights
into the ways that these interacting mechanisms drive edge E. This new understanding will enhance our
r
ability to predict and to influence edge E
r
and plasma performance in present-day and future tokamaks,
contributing to the goal of clean, carbon-neutral energy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Structure of Plasma-Water Interface
Dr. Elijah Thimsen, Assistant Professor
Washington University
St. Louis, MO 63130
Low temperature plasmas (LTPs) are fascinating systems capable of promoting chemical reactions
that can be unexpected in orthodox theory based upon the idea of local equilibrium. LTPs can be
harnessed for societal benefit, with notable successes in the areas of chemical energy storage and human
health. Recently, promising discoveries such as rapid wound healing have drawn attention to the action
of LTPs upon nominally aqueous media. Early reports have revealed that the plasma is capable of
promoting reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions in the aqueous phase, however a tractable framework
for understanding and controlling those redox reactions has not yet been developed. A key hypothesis of
this project is that the plasma-liquid interface can be understood as a boundary condition for the solution,
at which the reduction potential is defined by the plasma parameters. Consequently, the reduction
potential of the plasma-liquid interface can be tuned using the plasma parameters to selectively promote
redox reactions in solution. A secondary hypothesis is that the redox reactions occurring at the plasma-
liquid interface must be counterbalanced by the opposite reaction elsewhere in solution. For example, if
the plasma-liquid interface acts as an electrodeless cathode that promotes reduction reactions, then there
must be an electrodeless anode elsewhere in solution, where oxidation reactions occur. The existence of
the counterbalancing region is necessitated by charge neutrality. Robust experimental tools and methods
will be developed in this project to test these hypotheses, and others. A few applications will be explored
for redox reactions that are difficult to promote using solid electrodes, specifically multielectron transfer
reactions and reduction of complex organic mixtures that are relevant to energy storage and human
health.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Coherent Control of Strongly Interacting Spins in the Solid-State
Dr. Jeff Thompson, Assistant Professor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
Harnessing quantum coherence in many-body systems provides diverse opportunities ranging from
understanding quantum materials to applications in quantum information processing or quantum-
enhanced metrology. A central challenge in this field is maintaining full control at the single-particle level
while increasing the system complexity. This proposal aims to study the coherent quantum behavior and
dynamics of strongly interacting spin systems in the solid state. The central experimental tool is a
technique that we have recently developed, which allows the spins of single Erbium (Er3+) ion impurities
in a crystal host to be optically initialized and measured through a nanophotonic cavity. Importantly, the
addressing of individual ions is achieved in the frequency domain, instead of spatially, allowing for control
of individual spins with sub-10 nm separation, and therefore strong interactions. The strength of this
approach is highlighted by our recent demonstration of high fidelity (95%), single-shot readout of a single
spin within a dense ensemble. Using this platform, we plan to carry out fundamental investigations of
strongly interacting spin systems in solids, studying the interplay of different interaction mechanisms and
developing spectroscopy techniques to identify the governing Hamiltonian in a particular instance of the
system with randomly positioned spins. Furthermore, we will develop quantum control techniques to
generate arbitrary effective Hamiltonians. This will allow many-body quantum states to be protected from
noise and unwanted interactions, and is important to explore the potential of strongly interacting spin
systems for quantum information processing and quantum-enhanced metrology.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Catalytic Alkene Hydroesterification: New Tools for Polyester Synthesis and Beyond
Dr. Ian A. Tonks, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
The aim of this research is to design new catalytic routes to new advanced polyolefin materials, with
a specific emphasis on oxygenated polyolefins such as polyketones, polyesters, and polyketoesters. These
types of oxygenated polyolefins are important materials due to their potential biodegradability,
paintability, and melting temperatures. However, polyketones generally suffer from low processability
due to insolubility in common solvents, while the reactivity of polyester building blocks often limits their
practical synthesis. In both cases, the available suite of commodity building blocks—and consequently the
diversity of accessible polymer structures—is extremely limited. This project will connect two distinct
catalytic reactions, olefin/CO copolymerization and olefin hydroesterification, into a single process. By
combining these reactions it will be possible to couple inexpensive, biorenewable feedstocks into
traditional polyolefin copolymerizations, giving access to broad new classes of polyesters and
polyketoesters. An additional salient outcome of this work will be a thorough, quantitative understanding
of ligand effects/design for hydroesterification catalysis, which will have translational value in various
conversions of commodity chemicals.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Deep Learning Acceleration of the Boosted Higgs Program and HEP Computing
Dr. Nhan V. Tran, Wilson Fellow & Associate Scientist
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, Illinois 60510
In the post-Higgs boson discovery era, a comprehensive exploration of the characteristic properties
of the Higgs particle over the full running period of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, the European
Organization for Nuclear Research in Switzerland, provides an excellent opportunity to search for new
phenomena beyond the Standard Model of particle physics. One catalyst for these efforts is the
application of modern deep learning computational techniques. This research program focuses on the
study of the Higgs boson in a “boosted” regime at the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the
LHC, where the Higgs is produced with large momentum and thereby becomes particularly sensitive to
potential contributions for new physics at higher mass scales. Such precision measurements of the Higgs
in turn apply powerful deep learning algorithms to open up new Higgs signatures, which have yet to be
explored, while facing daunting computing challenges from massive datasets and increasingly complex
collision environments anticipated during future LHC runs. Further, the program aims to develop
solutions that capitalize on the synergies between machine learning and new heterogeneous
computational paradigms that are optimized for the next-generation of computing hardware and
software platforms. Deploying such resources not only has the potential to achieve an order of magnitude
improvement in computational efficiency but also evolve the existing LHC computing model in a cost-
effective way. Overall, the approach has broader applications for accelerating the use of sophisticated
deep learning algorithms in high energy physics as well as across other disciplines of science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Mechanistic Understanding of Heavy Ion Adsorption, Chemistry, and Separations
at Graphene Based 2D Materials Interfaces
Dr. Ahmet Uysal, Assistant Chemist
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Argonne, IL 60439
Chemical separations represent a crucial component of ongoing efforts to secure our nation’s
increasing energy, environmental, and economic security needs, such as the cleaning of millions of tons
of heavy-metal contaminated groundwater. While membrane-based separations are used in removing a
variety of trace-level contaminants, the lack of a mechanistic understanding of ion selectivity and
adsorption limits the ability to improve and expand these technologies. In sorbents and membrane
systems selectivity and adsorption are governed by an interfacial region with a thickness that is on the
order of a few nanometers. Chemical and physical properties of solute and solvent molecules can be
significantly different than their bulk counterparts in this nanoscale region and in confined regions.
Obtaining interface specific information that is not dominated by the overwhelmingly large bulk signal is
very difficult, yet necessary to gain a predictive understanding of interfacial phenomena in these
separation systems. This research project addresses these challenges by studying the fundamental surface
chemistry of heavy-ion (actinide and lanthanide) adsorption on graphene based two-dimensional
materials interfaces by a combination of surface specific probes, namely synchrotron x-ray scattering and
sum frequency generation spectroscopy. These methods provide direct, molecular-scale, element
specific, in situ information of ion adsorption desorption kinetics and thermodynamics from complex
solutions. This research provides an understanding of the ion-specific properties related to the surface
affinity, selectivity, and capacity, as well as the dependence of these properties on solution conditions
and surface functionalization. In a broader scientific context, this program will be an important step
towards achieving mechanistic control of interfaces and transport in complex and extreme environments
in alignment with the DOE Office of Science’s Basic Research Needs for Energy and Water.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Investigating the Impacts of Streamflow Disturbances on Water Quality
using a Data-driven Framework
Dr. Charuleka Varadharajan, Research Scientist
Energy Geosciences Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
The frequency of occurrence, intensity, and extent of floods and droughts are projected to increase
over the next decades due to climate change. Because these changes are likely to dramatically influence
processes governing watershed functioning, there is a pressing need to understand and predict how water
quality in streams and rivers will respond to new flow disturbance regimes. This study will determine how
future changes in streamflow-disturbance events, ranging from floods to low-flow conditions, will change
water quality over time. In addition, the research will explore how water quality further downstream of
disturbance locations will change. The analysis will account for differences in disturbance types and
watershed characteristics, including geomorphology, geology, climate, vegetation, and land use.
The approach will be based on further development and application of a new framework comprising
a novel data-integration tool, i.e., BASIN-3D, and sophisticated analytical methods including, e.g., wavelet
and statistical time-series analyses and machine-learning techniques. This framework will be able to
predict the resistance and resilience of water quality to different types of disturbance events, and will be
applied to the Colorado, Columbia, and Delaware River watersheds.
The outcome of this work will yield new predictions of watershed water quality responses to extreme
perturbations. The same framework will also serve as a hub to enable the generation and analysis of
integrated interagency watershed datasets in real-time that are transferable to many stakeholders.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Assembly and Repair of the Photosystem II Reaction Center
Dr. David Vinyard, Assistant Professor
Department of Biological Sciences
Louisiana State University and A&M College
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Natural photosynthesis provides a design template for the development of artificial photosynthesis
technologies. Plants, algae, and cyanobacteria use Earth-abundant materials to convert sunlight, water,
and carbon dioxide to sugars. If replicated in artificial photosynthesis systems, solar energy could
efficiently be converted to chemical energy stored in fuels. However, for such synthetic systems to be
useful, they must be efficiently assembled into their active forms and have a repair strategy to maintain
activity over extended time frames. In this proposal, we explore these concepts using the reaction center
Photosystem II (PSII). PSII uses visible light energy to strip electrons and protons from water at a Mn CaO
4 x
active site known as the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC). The OEC and the surrounding protein are
sensitive to reactive oxygen species and must be frequently repaired. We first propose the use of
techniques from molecular biology and protein biochemistry to explore the protein-protein interactions
that facilitate de novo PSII assembly. Next, we study how Mn and Ca ions are inserted into the protein to
form the OEC. This work applies inorganic and physical chemistry methods to reveal the rate-determining
step of the assembly process. Finally, we use a combination of stable isotope labeling experiments and
computer simulations to identify if or how damaged PSII centers are recognized for degradation and
repair. Together, this work will not only contribute toward our understanding of natural photosynthesis
but will also reveal synthesis and turnover strategies used by Nature that can potentially be replicated in
artificial systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences
and the DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Catalysis Driven by Confined Hot Carriers at the Liquid/Metal/Zeolite Interface
Dr. Bin Wang, Assistant Professor
School of Chemical, Biological and Materials Engineering (CBME),
University of Oklahoma
Norman, OK 73019
In the chemical industry, controlling the activity and selectivity of a chemical conversion process is of
immense importance. Traditionally, dissipation of thermal energy drives the transformation of reactants
toward a variety of products; it remains a key challenge for designing catalysts that drive dissociation and
formation of specific chemical bonds in the reactants toward certain desirable products with very high
selectivity. Introduction of light-sensitive solid materials into catalysis provides a powerful, alternate
strategy for this purpose. In this light-driven process, positive and negative charges, which are generated
through photoexcitation of coinage metal nanoparticles, trigger the dynamics of chemical bonds in the
reactants. The reaction selectivity can be boosted by manipulating the interplay between the photon
energy, the light-sensitive solid materials, and the reactants. The objective of this research is to provide
fundamental understanding of these light-driven bond dynamics at the molecular level. Leveraging
modern computational chemistry, this work aims to control energies and locations of the positive and
negative charges by positioning them in varied reaction environments, including microporous materials
and liquid solvents. The robust, fundamental theoretical investigations will deliver essential details that
will allow for the design of a novel, all-optical process of chemical transformation at low temperatures
with high chemical selectivity.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences
and the DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Fingerprinting Macromolecular Flow and Deformation with Neutrons
Dr. Yangyang Wang, Research and Development Staff Scientist
Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Polymer-based materials such as plastic and rubber are widely used to manufacture tools and
equipment for aerospace, automotive, electronic, medical, and other critical industries. However, the
unique mechanical properties of polymers that enable versatile, lightweight materials are not well
understood, which limits advances for large-scale manufacturing and 3D printing. This research will
provide fundamental insights on what happens at a molecular level as polymers melt, stretch, or
otherwise flow and deform in normal processing conditions. A novel approach combining neutron-based
techniques and computer simulation will map the dynamic “fingerprint” of polymers at work, offering the
first three-dimensional molecular perspectives on their complex behaviors. This work will open avenues
for improving our understanding of polymer flow and deformation through neutron scattering and inform
applied routes to rapid, cost-effective manufacturing for transformative energy technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Weyl Semimetals for High-Thermopower Transverse Thermoelectric Transport
Dr. Sarah J. Watzman, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering
University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221
Topological materials have inspired considerable excitement in the fields of materials science and
condensed matter physics in recent years, especially with the experimental discovery of topological Weyl
semimetals in 2015. Characterized by their unique surface states and high-mobility charge carriers, Weyl
semimetals are potentially transformative energy conversion materials. However, the unique transport
mechanisms present in Weyl semimetals are not well understood, especially in regards to thermoelectric
energy conversion. Determining which fundamental transport mechanisms contribute to and enhance
thermoelectric transport in Weyl semimetals would enable focused materials development, paving the
way toward dramatically more efficient solid-state energy conversion devices. Initial experimental results
in the field have shown unprecedented thermoelectric energy conversion in Weyl semimetals via the
Nernst effect, where the applied temperature gradient and resultant electric field are perpendicular to
one another. However, the transverse geometry of the Nernst effect requires a skew force – typically
imposed by an external magnetic field – to accelerate charge carriers perpendicular to a temperature
gradient. Interestingly, certain Weyl semimetals are expected to contain a net gauge field intrinsic to their
band structure, called a Berry curvature, that has the potential to serve as a source of the required skew
force, possibly eliminating the need for an externally applied magnetic field in the Nernst effect. The
ultimate goal of this research is to determine what makes a Weyl semimetal viable for transverse
thermoelectric energy conversion applications. This project will investigate three key knowledge gaps: 1)
how the movement of the chemical potential contributes to thermoelectric energy conversion when the
Weyl semimetal’s Dirac bands are tilted versus symmetric; 2) how the presence of a Berry curvature
potentially enhances this energy conversion; and 3) on what length scales these effects are present.
Coupled thermal, electrical, and magnetic transport will be characterized for targeted materials,
ultimately resulting in a comparative study of Weyl semimetals extended to single-crystal and
polycrystalline samples of varying grain sizes. This knowledge will help pave the way toward achieving the
energy conversion potential found by exploiting the unique band structure properties of Weyl semimetals.
This study will contribute to a foundational understanding of topological transport, with the ultimate goal
of transforming the field of thermoelectrics to viably include Weyl semimetals and the Nernst effect.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Irradiation Tailoring of Deformation-Induced Phase Transformations
Dr. Janelle P. Wharry, Assistant Professor
School of Nuclear Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Low temperature mechanical deformation of face centered cubic (fcc) metals and alloys typically
occurs through dislocation slip or twinning. But in some cases, deformation occurs through a martensitic
transformation, in which the fcc structure converts to the hexagonal close packed (hcp) and/or body
centered cubic (bcc) structure. Irradiation is believed to enhance the tendency for this martensitic
transformation to occur, although the underlying mechanisms are not understood. Some studies have
associated the enhanced martensitic transformation with the formation of dislocation loops (i.e.
interstitial-type defects) under irradiation, while other studies have suggested that pores (similar to
irradiation-induced vacancy-type defects) can facilitate the martensitic transformation. This study aims to
understand exactly how irradiation impacts the deformation-induced martensitic transformation. This
project will test the hypothesis that the nature, morphology, and relative populations of irradiation-
induced defects can enable precise tuning of the deformation mechanism by inducing localized variations
in the stacking fault energy (SFE). Work will focus on Fe-Mn alloys irradiated with different particles to
create tailored microstructures dominated either by vacancy-type or interstitial-type defects, or some
combination of these extremes. Small-scale mechanical testing techniques will introduce localized
deformation, including in-situ nanoindentation in the transmission electron microscope. Coupled phase
field-crystal plasticity models will be used to help elucidate the role of irradiation-induced changes in SFE.
A change in deformation mode under irradiation can have severe implications on the performance of
load-bearing materials under these conditions, such as nuclear reactor structural materials. This project
will open new pathways of irradiation-tailored phase transformations to facilitate materials design and
innovation across multiple energy generation applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Pursuing the Ultimate Power of Xenon Dark Matter Detectors
Dr. Jingke Xu, Physicist
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The concept of dark matter—the idea that a large fraction of our universe exists in a form we cannot
see—has become a cornerstone of modern particle physics and cosmology, but the nature of dark matter
remains unknown. To date, xenon-based detectors have set the most stringent limits in searches for heavy
dark matter interactions with ordinary matter. Such detectors deploy high-purity liquid xenon targets to
search for simultaneous charge (electron) and light (photon) signals produced by putative dark matter
particle interactions with xenon nuclei. Meanwhile, a large region of parameter space in well-motivated
theoretical dark matter models remains unexplored, where interactions of low-mass dark matter particles
may only generate small electron charge signals without detectable coincident light. However, due to the
high rates of few-electron background events observed in current xenon detectors when a light signal is
absent, such potential ‘electron-only’ dark matter signals cannot currently be efficiently identified. This
research program will investigate the origins of the observed few-electron background events in xenon
detectors and will demonstrate the suppression of such backgrounds using novel experimental
techniques. By simultaneously addressing background electrons inside the xenon volume and on the
volume boundaries, this project aims to develop a new liquid xenon detector design that can maintain
low background rates down to very small charge signal sizes without requiring coincident light detection.
The resulting small-scale and modest-cost detector can push the sensitivity of xenon-based dark matter
searches down to the single-electron-quantum level, and will test dark matter models in ways
complementary to that of other planned, large-scale dark matter search projects.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Development of Next-Generation Nb Sn Superconductors for Energy-Frontier Circular Colliders
3
Dr. Xingchen Xu, Associate Scientist
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, IL 60510
Further push of the energy frontier for high energy physics requires improvement of magnetic field in
circular accelerators. Nb Sn superconductor will be a workhorse for building dipole and quadrupole
3
magnets. However, the performance of present state-of-the-art Nb Sn conductors is not sufficient for
3
producing cost-effective high-field magnets. This research program aims to improve properties of Nb Sn
3
conductors using several novel techniques: (1) boosting their high-field critical current density by the
“artificial pinning center” (APC) technique, (2) improving their stability against quench (a phenomenon
that superconductors suddenly become resistive due to thermal perturbations) by incorporating
substances with high specific heat, (3) reducing their low-field magnetization via the APC technique.
Higher conductor critical current density allows building magnets with the targeted field using less
conductors. Improved stability would enable superconductors in magnets to reach closer to their critical
currents with fewer quenches. Reduced low-field magnetization in conductors is desired to suppress
several critical issues: conductor instability, field errors in magnets, and heat load due to A.C. losses. Proof-
of-principle work has demonstrated the effectiveness of the above techniques. This planned project aims
to further develop these promising techniques and then combine them to deliver a new type of Nb3Sn
conductors, which, if successful, can significantly reduce cost of future energy-frontier circular colliders
and also benefit other areas that rely on high-field magnets.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Synthesis of Motif and Symmetry for Accelerated Learning, Discovery, and Design
of Electronic Structures for Energy Conversion Applications
Dr. Qimin Yan, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19122
Inorganic compounds that exhibit optimal electronic structures and related properties are essential
for energy conversion applications, including photovoltaics, solid state lighting, solar fuel generation, and
others. The use of computational simulations combined with data-driven approaches offers a great
opportunity to understand the mapping from crystal structures to material properties and accelerate the
discovery and design of functional materials. Local structure environment and crystal/orbital symmetries
are key elements that control the structure-property correlations in inorganic compounds. This project
will develop a framework to incorporate structure motifs and crystal/orbital symmetries into the data-
driven materials discovery infrastructure. A material-to-graph mapping based on structure motifs and
their environments in crystals will be created for a large set of inorganic materials, and a global material
network will be created to link existing but isolated materials in the databases. By combining domain
knowledge with recent developments in data science, structure-motif-based and symmetry-incorporated
graph neural networks will be developed for effective learning and accurate predictions of electronic
structures and related properties. Fundamental understanding of the roles of structure motif and
symmetry will establish new hypotheses and design rules, which will be combined with high-throughput
computations based on density functional theory to discover novel metal oxides as light absorbers and
transparent conductors as well as two-dimensional (2D) light-emitting materials. Multi-tier screening
workflows that account for electronic and optical properties will be designed for material discovery.
Carrier transport behavior, such as self-trapping by phonons and recombination due to defects, will be
evaluated for those candidates with optimal electronic structures. Synergistic experiment synthesis and
optimization efforts will establish a feedback loop between theory and experiment, resulting in rapid
demonstration of oxide- and 2D-material-based devices for energy conversion applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Kinetic Synthesis of Metastable Nitrides
Dr. Andriy Zakutayev, Scientist
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL)
Golden CO, 80401
The discovery and synthesis of inorganic solid-state materials with novel compositions, structures,
and properties remains a grand challenge in materials science. A number of ternary nitride materials are
predicted to have a broad range of properties relevant to many energy applications, ranging from more
efficient light-emitting diodes to better superconducting qubits. Targeting the synthesis of specific
metastable nitride materials i.e. nitrides that are above the thermodynamic ground state for a particular
composition, is difficult due to required high temperatures or extreme reaction conditions. The objective
of this research is to gain a fundamental understanding and control of the synthesis of new metastable,
yet long-lived, ternary nitride materials under non-equilibrium conditions. The proposed approach to
metastable ternary nitrides will use kinetic synthesis methods that lower energy barriers towards specific
products, including cation-exchange reactions and crystallization from atomically dispersed precursors.
In-situ x-ray scattering and spectroscopy coupled with calorimetry measurements will be used to probe
reaction mechanisms. In addition to accessing new metastable nitride materials with useful properties,
this work will provide insight into non-equilibrium chemical reaction pathways that could be applicable to
other materials chemistries.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Atomic-scale Imaging of Magnetic and Electronic Orders in Complex Oxides
Dr. Ilija Zeljkovic, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Chemical doping of complex oxides has led to exciting discoveries such as high-temperature
superconductivity and colossal magnetoresistance over the past few decades. The process of chemical
doping is often accompanied by spatial inhomogeneity, characterized by nanometer-scale variations in
electronic and/or magnetic properties of the material. Although various microscopy techniques have
provided valuable nanoscale insight into electronic and chemical structures of many complex oxides, there
is still no atomic-scale magnetic information available on these systems. Spin-polarized scanning tunneling
microscopy (SP-STM) can in principle be used to image magnetic ordering, but SP-STM has historically
been applied primarily to relatively simple magnetic materials and nanostructures. This research project
aims to expand SP-STM imaging to complex oxides, focusing on uncovering the magnetic structure of
doped Iridium-based oxides (iridates) with sub-atomic precision. The main objectives include: (1)
visualizing the evolution of magnetism in iridates, as a function of charge carrier doping, temperature and
energy, (2) elucidating the relationship between the inhomogeneous electronic structure and magnetism
at the nanoscale, and (3) searching for signatures of new magnetic phases. The comprehensive
experimental approach developed in this project will provide a foundation to study other families of
complex oxides in which spin, charge and orbital degrees of freedom intertwine to create new states of
matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2019 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (07-26-2019)
Exploring Quantum Many-body Physics with a Trapped Ion Quantum Information Processor
Jiehang Zhang
Department of Physics
New York University - New York
New York, New York 10012
Quantum many-body physics is notoriously hard to model on classical computers. However,
expanding our understanding of these systems will help us gain insight into interesting emergent
phenomena, including exotic material properties such as superconductivity, as well as the spectra of
complex nuclei, which are composed of quarks and gluons at a fundamental level. In nuclear physics,
extensive efforts are devoted to computing the properties of increasingly large interacting systems, which
requires an exponential amount of resources on classical computers. With the recent advances of
quantum information processors, the potential of controllable quantum systems could be harnessed for
simulating these complex problems. This work will develop a system consisting of 20~100 singly-charged
ions, which are among the leading technologies for quantum computing and simulations. Here, qubits are
encoded in the electronic states of the ions, while the ions’ shared motional modes are used to create
tailored interactions between them. The topics this project will investigate include non-equilibrium
phenomena, for example in heavy-ion collisions, where the rapid generation of entanglement could lead
to thermalization. Investigating toy models of these mechanisms on a quantum information processor
will shine light on their details with high spatial and temporal resolution. Beyond proof-of-principle
demonstrations, the scope of this work also focuses on long-term improvements of the qubit quality and
quantity, to approach a regime that can no longer be reached using classical computers.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
