DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Harnessing Nanotechnology for Fusion Plasma‐Material Interface Research in an in‐situ Particle‐
Surface Interaction Facility
Dr. Jean‐Paul Allain, Assistant Professor
School of Nuclear Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
The aim of this project is to utilize nanotechnology to address and improve plasma facing
materials for use in a fusion device. The research intends to leverage advancements in nanotechnology
and materials science of irradiation‐driven nano‐structured materials for a novel materials solution at
the plasma‐material interface (PMI) in fusion devices. Extensive work on conventional plasma‐facing
component materials such as graphite and tungsten and wall‐conditioning strategies has been
conducted in the past two decades. However, currently there is no viable materials alternative to tame
the PMI for conditions found in a sustained burning fusion plasma devices. The work exploits an existing
small experimental facility that is capable of not only characterizing new materials but, more
importantly probing and manipulating materials at the nanoscale level while performing subsequent in‐
situ testing of their performance under simulated environments to discover new materials compatible
with the PMI in burning plasma devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
1
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Studies of Nuclear Reactions that Drive Stellar Explosions and Synthesize the Elements
Dr. Daniel Bardayan, Research Staff Member
Nuclear Astrophysics Group
Physics Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The origin of the elements in the cosmos, and the nuclear reactions that drive stars and stellar
explosions, involve short‐lived unstable nuclei not normally found on earth. Studies of these topics
require accelerator‐based experiments with exotic nuclei such as those available at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory's Holifield Radioactive Ion Beam Facility (HRIBF). This project will combine the
exotic beams of HRIBF with a new high‐density gas jet target using 3He and 4He to make direct studies
of astrophysical reactions and nuclei that power stellar explosions and synthesize the elements. Such a
measurement system will be unique in the world, and will greatly expand the ability to understand how
stars and their spectacular explosions create the elements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
2
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
GENEVA: An NLO event generator for the Large Hadron Collider
Dr. Christian Bauer, Senior Research Scientist
Theory Group
Physics Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
The objective of this project is to develop software tools that are crucial for physics discoveries
in hadron collider experiments, e.g., LHC, that probe the fundamental properties of Nature at the energy
frontier. The project will improve on existing tools by implementing and incorporating the most accurate
available theoretical calculations and predictions to simulate events that can be expected from the
known Standard Model of particle physics. One can then search for new physics by comparing data with
the expected events. Without such tools many signals of new physics (e.g., new particles, new
fundamental forces, etc.) may not be revealed from the huge amount of data generated from these
experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
3
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Investigation of Fundamental Limits to Beam Brightness Available From Photoinjectors
Dr. Ivan Bazarov, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
The objective of this project is to extend the fundamental understanding of high average current
low emittance sources of relativistic electrons necessary for a new generation of coherent X‐ray
synchrotron radiation facilities. The proposal aims to perform experimental and theoretical
investigations of the limits on beam brightness by focusing on photocathode sources and space charge
effects in a systematic way, by measuring, analyzing, and investigating ways to reduce thermal
emittance, and compensating emittance growth via laser pulse shaping and beam manipulations.
Understanding these effects is an important step in producing high brightness electron sources for
future light sources and electron diffraction applications. Better understanding of the associated physics
and generation of a low emittance beam can lead to significant cost saving for future light sources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
4
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Research and Development of Detection Systems for Neutron Imaging
Dr. Philip Bingham, Research and Development Staff Member
Image Science and Machine Vision Group
Measurement Science and Systems Engineering Division
Energy and Engineering Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The objective of this project is to develop a high‐resolution transmission imaging system for the
simultaneous collection of neutron and x‐ray computed tomographic projections using energy‐
dependent neutrons. Current state‐of‐the‐art neutron radiography is reaching the 10‐15?m resolution
range with high cost detectors; however, typical resolutions are on the order of no better than 50?m
today. The proposed development will result in an increased resolution using less expensive, lower
resolution detectors through the use of a magnified detection system whose novel feature consists of
combining neutron and x‐ray transmission images. Together, the neutron and x‐ray images provide
complementary information due to the different mechanisms by which neutrons and x‐rays interact
with materials and their associated energy‐dependent attenuation coefficients. By combining these
distinct imaging modalities into a single system, different material properties can be quantified and
higher resolution can be achieved.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
5
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Scaling Laws in Magnetized Plasma Turbulence
Dr. Stanislav Boldyrev, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53715
The objective of this research is to develop new analytic approaches, conduct numerical
simulations with unprecedented resolution, and train students to carry out a comprehensive study of
parameter‐scalable regimes of magnetized‐plasma turbulence. Plasma is a dynamically rich and
technologically potent state of matter, beyond solid, liquid, and gas. A distinguishing property of plasma
is its sensitivity throughout its volume to perturbations in density or velocity even in a small region.
When embedded in an ambient magnetic field, the plasma can be sensitive also to perturbations in the
magnetic field. Depending on the size of the plasma, this collective behavior can take place over lengths
as small as a few centimeters, e.g., in laboratories, and as large as thousands of light years, e.g., in
astronomy. Through the power of equations that express scaled relationships of parameters, a single
mathematical model can predict the properties and dynamics of phenomena associated with almost any
size and parameter value of the plasma. The magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) model is often invoked for
this purpose because plasma behaves like an electrically conducting fluid embedded in a magnetic field.
This model involves details, the appropriateness and microscopic level of which need to be customized
for the specific laboratory or astronomical application, which are not always agreed upon by scientists
and won't be until experiments can validate such details. In the meantime, the theories that describe
these details sometimes lead to contradicting predictions, as the theories are typically empirical or
phenomenological. Weak MHD turbulence, strong MHD turbulence, and magnetic dynamo action will be
emphasized in the study.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
6
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Reliable High Performance Peta‐ and Exa‐Scale Computing
Dr. Grigory Bronevetsky, Computer Scientist
Computer Science Group
Center for Applied Scientific Computing
Computation Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The goal of this research is to predict the effects of system faults and enable developers to
protect their applications against the most likely and/or most critical errors. The project will develop
statistical models that describe fault propagation through system modules and abstraction layers,
synthesizing these models to create a full system model. The full model will be able to predict the
effects of system faults, which will make it possible to develop vulnerability profiles for application and
system software, which in turn will allow operating system developers to protect them against the most
likely and/or most critical errors. The methodology will be applied to two major types of problems:
component failures and performance degradations on MPI applications, and soft fault‐induced data
corruptions on numerical applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
7
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Ultrafast Electron Diffraction from Aligned Molecules
Dr. Martin Centurion, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE 68588
The goal of this project is to capture the three‐dimensional structure and dynamics of molecules
with atomic resolution using ultrafast electron diffraction. Electron diffraction from molecules in the gas
phase is a successful technique for determining the structure of isolated molecules. Due to the random
orientation of molecules in a gas, only one‐dimensional information such as bond lengths can be
retrieved from the diffraction patterns. The experimental method proposed in this work solves this
problem by combining electron diffraction with laser alignment. This will allow the retrieval of full
three‐dimensional images of molecular structure. A key to the success of this project will be the design
and implementation of a new instrument to produce ultrafast pulses of electrons. After demonstrating
the ability to record static images of small molecules, the method will be extended to more complex
molecules such as biomolecules that cannot be crystallized. The method will also be extended to study
the dynamics of molecules in space and time.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
8
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Sustainable Silicon ‐ Energy‐Efficient VLSI Interconnect for Extreme‐Scale Computing
Dr. Patrick Yin Chiang, Assistant Professor
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
The objective of this research is to develop energy‐efficient, VLSI inter‐connect circuits and
systems that will facilitate future massively‐parallel, high‐performance computing. The project will
address critical barriers on the path to extreme‐scale high‐performance computing. The goal of the
project is to improve energy‐efficiency of off‐ and on‐ chip interconnects by more than an order of
magnitude over conventional techniques by optimizing power consumption in global and local clock
distribution to parallel links; understanding the theoretical and practical limits to fine‐grain,
instantaneous power gating of on/off links; exploring energy‐efficient circuit topologies; and
determining the limitations to using low‐voltage swing for parallel interconnect such as core‐core and
crossbar links.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
9
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Superconducting Technology for Magnet Systems in Fusion Machines
Dr. Luisa Chiesa, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Tufts University
Medford, MA 2155
The objective of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the mechanical and
material properties of superconductors. The aim is to understand the electromechanical behaviors of
superconducting materials for both low (LTS) and high temperature superconductors (HTS).
Superconducting magnets play a key role for the confinement of plasma in a large fusion energy device,
providing magnetic fields high enough to confine the plasma and produce substantial fusion power
density. The magnet components alone account for a considerable fraction (~30% for the International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER)) of the investment in the fusion device (~50% of the magnet
system cost is for superconducting materials). Low temperature superconductors, which are used both
in current and near‐term fusion devices, have showed unexpected sizable degradations compared to the
expected currents estimated from single strand values. Those degradations are due to the inherent
mechanical loads caused by thermal contractions and operational electro‐magnetic forces.
Understanding this behavior and designing around it will be extremely beneficial to the development of
magnet technology for not only fusion but other magnet applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
10
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Thylakoid Assembly and Folded Protein Transport by the Tat Pathway
Dr. Carole Dabney‐Smith, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
Miami University
Oxford, OH 45056
This project aims to better understand a critical protein transport pathway found in the
chloroplasts of plants, bacteria, and some archaebacteria required for the assembly and maintenance of
functional photosynthetic membranes. The proper assembly, maintenance, and function of the
photosynthetic apparatus in the chloroplasts of green plants depend on three protein transport systems
found in thylakoid membranes. The objective of this strongly‐focused project is to better understand
one of these three essential protein transport systems: the Twin arginine translocation (Tat) system. This
transport system, also found in bacteria and some archaebacteria, is responsible for the proper location
of ~50% of thylakoid lumen proteins. It is also rather unique in that it transports fully‐folded and
assembled proteins across ion‐tight membranes using only three membrane components combined
with the protonmotive force generated by photosynthesis. The successful completion of these studies
will give us a better understanding of the biogenesis of photosynthetic membranes, and could provide
the rationale as well as the means to engineer photosynthetic complexes into synthetic membranes for
energy production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
11
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Deformation and Failure Mechanisms of Shape Memory Alloys
Dr. Samantha Daly, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
The objective of this research project is to understand the fundamental mechanisms driving the
deformation and failure of shape memory alloys. The project will seek to elucidate the mechanisms of
shape memory behavior by developing and utilizing new methodologies to study the complex phase
transformations that give rise to the unique properties of these materials. The investigator will conduct
a comprehensive suite of experiments across multiple length scales and tie these results to theoretical
and computational modeling. Linkages of atomic interactions, sub‐granular transformation, intra‐
granular interactions, localized strain banding and macroscopic behavior in model Nickel‐Titanium alloys
will be made. Developing a fundamental understanding of the shape‐memory behavior at small length
scales can lead to improved vibration response in microscale energy harvesting devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
12
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Generation and Characterization of Ultra‐short electron beams for xray free electron lasers
Dr. Yuantao Ding, Accelerator Physicist
Beam Physics Department
Accelerator Research Division
Accelerator Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
The goal of this project is to develop mechanisms for generating ultra‐short x‐ray pulses that will
enable the study of ultra‐fast processes, such as electronic motions in atoms. This research will
investigate ultra‐short electron beam generation and characterization utilizing analytical, computational,
and experimental methods. Free‐electron lasers (FELs) are tunable, high power, coherent sources for
short‐pulse, short‐wavelength radiation. Short x‐ray pulses will enable the ability to photograph atomic
motion or to trace the dynamics of molecular structure. The generation of even shorter x‐ray pulses
("ultra‐short") is a formidable challenge requiring theoretical and experimental breakthroughs. Shorter
x‐ray pulses, like a few femto‐seconds or atto‐seconds, will allow for the direct observation of electronic
motion in an atom and enable many new ultrafast studies such as time‐resolved electronic dynamics,
with widespread applications in physics, chemistry and biology.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
13
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Directed Assembly of Hybrid Nanostructures Using Optically Resonant Nanotweezers
Dr. David Erickson, Assistant Professor
Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
The goal of this project is to investigate the assembly of hybrid nanostructures using
nanophotonically directed optical forces and to enable the directed assembly of nanostructures using
nanophotonic optical devices that cannot be manufactured by other means. This approach offers a
novel means to directly manipulate nanoscale matter, possibly down to the biomolecule level, for
generating unique nanocomposites and ordered arrays and could usher in the development of new
materials that harness or modulate energy. While the focus of this work will be on understanding some
of the fundamental physics behind this new approach, the ultimate implementation of the technique as
an optical nanofactory to fabricate unique high efficiency photoelectric or photo‐thermal energy
conversion devices is envisioned.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
14
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Model‐Independent Dark‐Matter Searches at the ATLAS Experiment and Applications of Many‐core
Computing to High Energy Physics
Dr. Amir Farbin, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Texas, Arlington
Arlington, TX 76019
Astronomical observations provide strong evidence that the Universe is dominated by two
mysterious phenomena known as Dark Matter and Dark Energy. Both may be explained by new
particles or forces which have yet to be discovered. The PI proposes to perform a first search for particle
Dark Matter with the ATLAS detector at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. To pursue the
computationally intensive analysis techniques required by this proposal, the PI plans research into using
General Purpose Graphical Processing Units (GPGPU), an emerging technology in which tens of
thousands of simple processing units are marshaled in parallel to achieve orders of magnitude
acceleration of certain calculations. This project will also explore other applications of GPGPU
computing in High Energy Physics (HEP), including the most commonly used software tools in HEP, and
finally tackle the very challenging areas of data reconstruction and simulation.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
15
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
First Principles Modeling of Metal‐Electrolyte Systems: A Novel Approach to the Study of the
Electrochemical Interface
Dr. Maria‐Victoria Fernandez‐Serra, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
This project aims to computationally improve fundamental understanding of electrically induced
chemical reactions in the condensed phase and at the liquid‐metal interface. Improvement of future
energy production and delivery systems ‐ such as fuel cells, batteries, and next‐generation hydrogen‐
production devices ‐ require an unprecedented and detailed fundamental understanding of the
interactions and processes occurring at the liquid‐metal interface. The rate at which these processes
occur ultimately determines the power of such systems. However, these rates are known to change as
the system begins to deliver electricity and when the system is exposed to electromagnetic radiation
such as sunlight. The power output is also strongly influenced by the very nature and peculiarities of the
electrolyte. This works capitalizes upon a broad base of recent advances of quantum‐mechanical
computational methods to systematically understand how chemical reaction rates occurring at the
liquid‐electrode interface can be modified to optimize the system's power. Further it seeks to extend
these capabilities so that simultaneous modeling and optimization of both the electrolyte and electrode
can be realized in the first half of this decade. In addition to fuel cells and batteries, future technologies
which depend on these fundamental advances include advances in photocatalysis, which will lead to
solar induced water‐splitting for hydrogen production and the eventual understanding of light‐induced
production of more complex fuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
16
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Chemical Frustration: A Design for the Discovery of New Complex Alloy and Intermetallic Phases
Dr. Daniel Fredrickson, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53715
The goal of this project is to test and develop the use of chemical frustration as a means of
structural control in intermetallics. This research will determine whether the concept of chemical
frustration, an incompatibility between different modes of packing or bonding of chemical components,
can be used to create new intermetallic structures. Intermetallics are made up of two or more metals
but whose properties are often intermediate between metals and ceramics, yielding unique properties
for magnets, high temperature alloys, superconductors, and other applications. The program will
develop and use theory and computational analysis to understand how chemical frustration impacts the
electronic structures of synthesized materials. By coupling the synthesis of new materials with strong
structural determination and theory, this work could produce the fundamental knowledge and
guidelines needed to design intermetallics with optimum properties.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
17
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Molecular Transuranic Discovery Science: Underpinning National Energy Security and Waste
Remediation Needs
Dr. Andrew Gaunt, Technical Staff Member
Inorganic, Isotope and Actinide Chemistry Group
Chemistry Division
Chemistry, Life, and Earth Sciences Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The objective of this project is to gain a more complete understanding of the fundamental
chemical bonding properties of uranium, plutonium, and related actinide elements to underpin the
rational molecular design and development of novel, more efficient separation strategies for advanced
nuclear fuel cycles, and to develop transformative knowledge about the extent to which covalent
interactions control actinide bonding with complexants in advanced nuclear fuel cycles. The main
components of all nuclear fuels are actinides. These radioactive chemical elements (such as uranium and
plutonium) with many protons, neutrons, and electrons display unique chemical, nuclear, and materials
properties. Waste‐minimizing nuclear fuel cycles must recycle used nuclear fuel, requiring
transformative chemical knowledge to develop advanced separation technologies. The focus of Dr.
Gaunt's research will be to carry out chemical syntheses, coupled with structural, spectroscopic and
theoretical analyses to determine the bond geometries and strengths between "soft donor ligands"
(relatively covalently bonded complexants) with actinide ions that participate in nuclear fuel cycles. By
carrying the investigation across the 5f series from thorium through curium, the research is expected to
develop soft‐donor ligands and bonding trends for all actinide ions in nuclear fuel cycles in all relevant
oxidation states. The results will provide a foundation for design of advanced separation technologies in
next generation fuel cycles. It is expected to show how basic chemical bonding principles such as
structure, bond strength, covalency, and ligand donor type can achieve preferential bonding for actinide
ions over lanthanide ions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
18
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Investigation of the Role of Inhomogeneities and Phase Segregation on Correlated Electron Dynamics
by Optical Spectroscopy and Nano‐imaging
Dr. Adrian Gozar, Associate Physicist
Oxide Molecular Beam Epitaxy Group
Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department
Basic Energy Sciences Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
The objective of this project is to understand the role of intrinsic and extrinsic inhomogeneities
at transitions between insulating, metallic and superconducting phases in strongly correlated electronic
materials by using optical spectroscopy in the infrared and THz frequency ranges with nanometer spatial
resolution. Through the combination of local probes with spectroscopy, the PI will develop a scattering‐
based scanning near‐field microscopy system for the study of electron dynamics in metal‐insulator and
metal‐superconducting transitions in correlated electronic systems and local electronic reconstructions
at interfaces in transition metal oxide heterostructures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
19
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Reducing Scale Dependence of Physics Parameterizations for Global Cloud Resolving Climate Models
Dr. William Gustafson, Scientist III
Atmospheric Chemistry and Meteorology Group
Atmospheric Sciences and Global Change Division
Fundamental and Computational Sciences Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
The aim of this project is to increase the resolution of climate models by developing new
parameterizations for processes such as clouds and radiation that are more adaptable to different
spatial scales. The research will help address significant challenges in increasing the resolution of
climate models, for example, from 100 to 1 km grid spacing. The research will help merge two different
modeling cultures, one that has traditionally used coarse model resolutions integrated over long time
periods for climate simulations versus one that has used high‐resolution models for detailed studies of
climate processes over shorter periods. The research will attempt to develop physics parameterizations
for processes such as clouds, radiation, turbulence and other sub‐grid phenomena that "sense" the
underlying grid spacing and adapt accordingly or use assumptions appropriate for that resolution. A
methodology will be adopted whereby individual parameterizations will be run at arbitrary resolutions
compared to the remaining portions of the model, enabling determination of which parameterizations
are most susceptible to scale issues. Based on those observations, targeted improvements to the
parameterizations will be made with the goal of developing scale‐adaptive parameterizations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
20
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Diamond Pixel Luminosity Telescopes
Dr. Valerie Halyo, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 8544
Proper monitoring and calibration of the instantaneous and integrated luminosity has direct
input to almost all physics results for the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) Collaboration at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. The PI intends to use particle tracking telescopes based on single‐crystal
synthetic diamond detectors with the existing CMS pixel readout chip to provide an independent
measure of luminosity with different systematic errors than the traditional calorimeter‐based system.
Diamond has a clear advantage over other technologies such as silicon in that it can be deployed
without a complex cooling system and can thus be easily retrofit into the CMS detector. Diamond is
also unique in its excellent radiation hardness, a requirement given the operating environment of the
device at the LHC. Results from this project provide valuable experience in operating a detector in high
radiation environment, leading to techniques involving the use of synthetic diamond detectors in High
Energy Physics, dosimetry and space applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
21
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
New States of Matter and Quantum Simulation with Ultracold Alkaline Earth Fermions
Dr. Michael Hermele, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
This research project involves theoretical studies of strongly correlated systems realized with
ultracold alkaline‐earth atoms (AEAs) in optical lattice potentials. AEAs, which have shown the existence
of strong correlation effects that are inaccessible in solid state materials, are expected to not only
provide fertile ground for the realization of new states of matter but to also yield new insights into
correlation effects more generally. Using analytical and numerical techniques of many‐body and
quantum field theory, the objectives will be to identify likely ground states to characterize their
observable properties and devise schemes for their detection, and to develop an understanding of their
phase diagram.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
22
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Neutrinos in the Universe
Dr. Patrick Huber, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, VA 24061
The primary objective of this project is to develop and advance theoretical tools to analyze and
interpret data from neutrino experiments, the results of which will improve our understanding of
neutrinos' properties and the role they play in the cosmos. Since the Standard Model of particles in its
minimal version does not admit neutrino mass, the fact that neutrinos have mass suggests that
neutrinos may be an important portal to new physics beyond the Standard Model. In addition to
providing support for experimental projects such as the Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment, this
research will also use neutrinos as a tool for understanding high‐energy and astrophysical phenomena,
including ultra high energy cosmic rays and supernovae.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
23
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Introducing Enabling Computational Tools to the Climate Sciences: Multi‐Resolution Climate
Modeling with Adaptive Cubed‐Sphere Grids
Dr. Christiane Jablonowski, Assistant Professor
Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space Sciences
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
The objective of this effort is to develop a modern climate circulation model that enables
computational resources to be focused on regions of greatest change. The research will develop a new
atmospheric model appropriate for climate simulations that introduces state‐of‐the‐art techniques for
resolving multiple scales. These techniques, collectively known as adaptive mesh refinement, allow
extreme‐scale computational resources to be focused on spatial regions of greater interest, such as
coastlines or mountain ranges, or on hard‐to‐resolve phenomena, such as cyclones. Success will result
in more efficient climate simulations that capture more small‐scale atmospheric phenomena than would
otherwise be possible.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
24
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Theory and Simulation of Tailored Assembly in Rod‐Coil Polymer Nanocomposites
Dr. Arthi Jayaraman, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
The objective of this research is to use theory and simulations to study tailored assembly within
polymer nanocomposites in order to spatially engineer rod‐ coil polymer nanocomposites for
photovoltaic devices. Theory and molecular simulations will be combined to study the morphology of
conjugated rod‐coil block copolymers, a type of polymer that is used in plastic solar cells. The impact
that structure of the polymer molecules and the addition of spherical nanoparticles have on bulk and
thin film morphology will be investigated with the aim of discovering the fundamental principles needed
to tailor the nanocomposite properties. This work could have a significant impact on our understanding
of how to design organic solar cells with higher efficiencies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
25
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Nonequilibrium Physics and Phase‐Field Modeling of Multiphase Flow in Porous Media
Dr. Rubin Juanes, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 2139
Understanding complex flow physics remains a major challenge in geosciences, and in many
other physical sciences and engineering sciences. Modeling subsurface flow patterns requires both
improved experimental determinations and better theoretical constructs representing the critical
relationships. The innovative new approach in this proposed effort has its origins in the mathematical
description of solidification processes. An attractive aspect of the approach is that it lays out
hypotheses that are nontrivial, and testable by carefully‐designed laboratory experiments. This would be
a very important result in soft‐matter physics, and in a number of energy system problems such as
improved oil and gas recovery, CO2 sequestration, improved efficiency in fuel cells, and improved
designs for micro‐fluidic devices, all of which depend on the formation and control of fluid‐fluid
instabilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
26
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Generation, Imaging, and Control of Ultrafast Electrical Currents and Radiation
Dr. Ki‐Yong Kim, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
The goal of this research is to elucidate the underlying mechanisms in the production and
control of ultrafast electrical currents and terahertz (THz) electromagnetic radiation by using ultra‐short
optical laser pulses. Various laser‐matter interaction schemes will be explored for the ultrafast electrical
current and THz generation. Ultrafast imaging techniques will be developed to visualize in time and
space the propagation of excitations at metal‐dielectric interfaces with femtosecond and micron
resolution. The coherent control of electromagnetic radiation in the broad THz to extreme ultraviolet
spectral range is expected to greatly benefit the ultrafast optical science community.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
27
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
A Systems Biology, Whole‐Genome Association Analysis of the Molecular Regulation of Biomass
Growth and Composition in Populus deltoides
Dr. Matias Kirst, Assistant Professor
School of Forest Resources and Conservation
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
The goal of this research is to identify the genes that are the basis for the variation in biomass
and biofuel productivity‐related traits in the genus Populus (the poplar tree). Poplars are the principal
woody crop species used for clean, renewable and sustainable fuels in North America because of their
fast, perennial growth habit and wide natural distribution in a broad range of environments. This
project will identify genes underlying bioenergy‐associated traits in poplar using an innovative approach
to map genome‐wide changes related to lignocellulosic biomass formation. This novel method, that will
use data from previously sequenced poplar cultivars to capture biomass‐related genes in a poplar
population, promises to reveal a much larger fraction of the poplar genetic diversity than previously
possible. The results will help answer the very important question of which genes regulate biomass
productivity and its composition.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
28
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Multifunctional Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalyst Design and Synthesis
Dr. John Kitchin, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
The objective of this project is to build a theoretical foundation for the molecular design of non‐
noble metal, oxide‐based, catalysts for the electrocatalytic reduction of oxygen, and to synthesize and
use stable and active electrocatalysts of tailored structure and composition. The efficiency of various
energy technologies critically depends on the efficiency of oxygen evolution, yet detailed mechanistic
understanding of such multielectron reduction is lacking for other than a few metal electrocatalysts. In
particular, metal‐oxide based electrodes (e.g., Ni oxide) are desirable for reasons of abundance when
compared to noble‐metal alloys, yet high‐level electronic structure calculations of oxides under reaction
conditions and of the organic or inorganic reactions catalyzed by them are rare. In this project, utilizing
an atomistic thermodynamic framework based on density functional theory, the stability of nickel oxide
surfaces under oxygen evolution conditions will be assessed as a function of the promoter transition
metal oxide used. High surface area, mesoporous and promoted nickel oxide nanocatalysts will be
synthesized and used as electrocatalysts for water electrolysis, for the purpose of testing and refining
the theoretical methods.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
29
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Search for Time Reversal Symmetry Violation with TREK and J‐PARC
Dr. Michael Kohl, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Hampton University
Hampton, VA 23668
The discovery of new sources of charge‐parity (CP) violation is necessary to explain the observed
matter‐antimatter asymmetry in the current universe, which the current Standard Model fails to
explain. This project will pursue the Time‐Reversal Experiment with Kaons (TREK) at the Japan Proton
Accelerator Research Complex (J‐PARC) to measure the time (T) violating transverse muon polarization
in decay of stopped charged kaons as a sensitive search for T‐violation. A non‐zero value of this
observable would be the first observation of new physics in a T‐violation experiment. Based on the CPT
theorem, such an observation would be equivalent to CP‐violation beyond the present accepted scheme
of quark configuration mixing in the Standard Model and offer such a source CP violation. This project
will design and build prototype detectors to be used in the TREK experiment, in anticipation that the
experiment will be carried out in 2013, with the first results available before the end of the grant period.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
30
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Evaluating the Oxidative, Photothermal and Electrical Stability of Colloidal Nanocrystal Solids
Dr. Matthew Law, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
This goal of this project is to bring a fundamental understanding to the degradation mechanisms
of semiconducting nanocrystals (NCs) and to introduce new physical and chemical strategies in an effort
to improve their operating lifetimes and overall performance in technological applications. The research
will use field‐effect transistors and solar cells as model systems to establish the degradation
mechanisms and develop effective countermeasures. By revealing both how NCs degrade in response to
environmental stresses (oxidative, photothermal, and electric) and identifying ways to prevent this
degradation, the project will greatly improve our ability to develop new materials for applications from a
broad range of nanoscale building blocks, including nanocrystals, nanowires and organic‐inorganic
hybrid structures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
31
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Ton Scale Germanium: Beyond Zeptobarn WIMP Cross‐section
Dr. Rupak Mahapatra, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77845
The currently favored explanation for the invisible "Dark Matter" that holds galaxies together is
a new kind of fundamental particle: a Weakly Interacting Massive Particle (WIMP). These particles may
be produced and detected in high‐energy particle collisions at the Fermilab Tevatron or the CERN Large
Hadron Collider, but there are also many active searches underway to directly detect cosmic WIMPs
interacting with normal matter. The extremely weak nature of the WIMP interaction dictates detectors
that have extremely low naturally occurring radioactive background, a large active volume (mass) of
sensitive detector material to maximize statistics, and a highly efficient rejection of any residual
background. To fully explore the possible WIMP parameters we need to scale up from the current few
kilogram experiment to few ton experiments. This proposal is a three‐pronged, phased approach to
address all these issues through the research work of the PI as a member of the Cryogenic Dark Matter
Search (CDMS) collaboration, and the next generation proposals for 100kg‐scale SuperCDMS and ton‐
scale Germanium Observatory for Dark Matter (GEODM) experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
32
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Probing Neutrino Properties with Long‐Baseline Neutrino Beams
Dr. Alysia Marino, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
We know from other experiments that neutrinos have very small masses, come in three types
and can undergo transitions from one type to another (often called "neutrino oscillations"). This
phenomenon causes the disappearance of electron antineutrinos coming from the sun and muon
neutrinos produced in cosmic ray showers in Earth's atmosphere. However, more precise measurements
of neutrino properties require intense man‐made neutrino sources, such as accelerator‐produced
neutrino beams, traveling through multiple detectors at different distances. The PI proposes a research
program that will center on investigating neutrino oscillations with the high‐intensity Tokai‐to‐Kamioka
(T2K) accelerator neutrino experiment, and will also support preliminary design work for a potential
future Long‐Baseline Neutrino Experiment (LBNE) the US. The primary focus of this project will be
measurement and analysis of neutrino beam data in the T2K experiment to understand the properties of
the beam, and using this knowledge to inform design choices for LBNE.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
33
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
An Experimental Research Program on Chirality at the LHC
Dr. Christina Markert, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
One of the main remaining topics in the nuclear evolution of the universe is a profound
understanding of the phase transition from partonic (quark‐gluon) to hadronic (nucleon) matter, which
happened a few microseconds after the Big Bang. According to modern calculations, two fundamental
symmetries of quantum chromodynamics, chirality and color and its deconfinement, are expected to be
restored at the transition to the quark‐gluon plasma. Experiments at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
have yielded evidence of color deconfinement, but it is conceivable that the facility is not energetic
enough to populate the high mass resonance states relevant to studies of chirality. This project will
develop and apply a new analysis strategy to study chirality using hadronic resonances detectable with
the ALICE experiment at the very high energy Large Hadron Collider at CERN.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
34
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Predictive Modeling of Complex Physical Systems: New Tools for Uncertainty Quantification,
Statistical Inference, and Experimental Design
Dr. Youssef Marzouk, Assistant Professor
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 2139
The aim of this project is to develop rigorous mathematical formulations and scalable simulation
approaches for quantifying uncertainties in large‐scale simulations of complex systems. The research
will focus on quantifying uncertainties that may arise due to incomplete knowledge of the phenomena,
imprecise measurements, or insufficient computing power, when making predictions through modeling
and simulation. Advanced mathematical and statistical techniques will be employed to develop tools for
efficiently computing uncertainties in complex systems, test new techniques for using available
observation data to improve models, build a comprehensive, scalable framework for automating the
modeling and simulation‐uncertainty quantification process, and demonstrate the utility of these tools
through the modeling and simulations of combustion processes and subsurface flows. This research in
quantification of uncertainties will allow scientists to understand how to use available knowledge to
improve models of complex systems, effect sound management of limited resources in designing and
conducting experiments, and make simulation‐based predictions with increased confidence.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
35
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Design of the Near Detectors and Optimization of Water and Ice Targets for Fine‐Grained Tracking
Detectors for the Fermilab Long‐Baseline Neutrino Experiment
Dr. Christopher Mauger, Physicist
Subatomic Physics Group
Physics Division
Associate Directorate of Experimental Physical Sciences
Principal Associate Directorate of Science, Technology and Engineering
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The Long‐Baseline Neutrino Experiment (LBNE) is actively being developed in the U.S. This
project will employ a neutrino beam at Fermilab aimed at a far site ‐‐ most likely the proposed Deep
Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory in Lead, South Dakota, (currently being developed by
the National Science Foundation) ‐‐ to search for neutrino transitions from one type to another . LBNE
will measure these transitions with unprecedented sensitivity, which will reveal key properties of these
elusive fundamental particles. These experiments work by observing the rate of neutrino interactions in
"near" detectors close to the beam and in "far" detectors 100's of kilometers away to see if any
neutrinos appear (or disappear) in between; the (dis)appearance is evidence that the neutrinos
oscillated from one type to another. The PI proposes to lead the development of the suite of near
detectors required to optimize the sensitivity of the LBNE project. The PI will focus particularly on using
the near detectors to measure neutrino processes that contribute to the background in the far detector.
In addition, the PI will develop liquid and solid water targets for a fine‐grained tracking near detector.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
36
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
An Integrated Theory on the Mechanisms of Vegetation Survival and Mortality During Drought
Dr. Nathan McDowell, Staff Scientist
Earth and Environmental Sciences Division
Chemistry, Life and Environmental Sciences Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The goal of this project is to develop and test a new and improved theory that describes the
mortality and survival of vegetation during drought. Research will focus on understanding the impacts
of climate change on terrestrial ecosystems with an emphasis on regional scale vegetation mortality
during droughts. In particular, the research will attempt to address three significant knowledge gaps,
including: 1) improved understanding and resolution of controversy over the specific mechanisms of
vegetative mortality, 2) understanding the variability in vegetation mortality that, for unknown reasons,
is correlated to plant size and 3) the role of moisture versus temperature as mortality drivers during
drought. Research will use manipulative experiments to generate results and datasets that will be used
to develop a new and improved mortality model that will be tested against independent field data.
Vegetation will span a range from Arabidopsis to pine trees. Coordination with leading scientists in the
molecular, ecological, and dynamic modeling fields will ensure maximum knowledge gain.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
37
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
High Resolution Spectroscopic X‐ray Detectors using Superconducting Sensors
Dr. Antonino Miceli, Assistant Physicist
Optics and Detectors Group
X‐ray Science Division
Advanced Photon Source
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
The objective of this project is to develop spectroscopic x‐ray detectors with high energy
resolution using superconducting sensors that are optimized for high‐count rate experiments. The
research will focus on developing x‐ray detectors using a promising new technology that measures the
energy of the incoming photons and the consequent change in the properties of superconducting
sensors. The current state‐of‐art spectroscopic x‐ray detectors are semiconductor devices (e.g., silicon
drift diodes) whose energy resolution is approaching their theoretical limit. The new detectors, called
Microwave Kinetic Inductance Detectors (MKIDs), allow for the increased energy resolution necessary
for high‐intensity x‐ray experiments including x‐ray micro/nano‐probes and x‐ray absorption
spectroscopy for biology and geophysical applications. By multiplexing the readout of arrays of MKIDs
one can build detectors capable of high count rates. The research has the potential to impact the
scientific output in several areas of x‐ray spectroscopy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
38
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Inorganic Nanocomposite Electrodes for Electrochemical Energy Storage and Energy Conservation
Dr. Delia Milliron, Staff Scientist and Facility Director
Inorganic Nanostructures Facility
The Molecular Foundry
Materials Sciences Division
Energy and Environmental Sciences
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
This project aims to develop a combinatorial approach to solution‐processed inorganic
nanocomposite materials as a new route to the complex physical properties required for efficient energy
storage and conservation devices. The research will apply a new, general solution‐processing approach
to fabricate well‐controlled, chemically and morphologically tunable inorganic nanocomposites for
battery and electrochromic device electrodes. Modular combinations will be made of different
nanoparticle compositions sizes, and of secondary phase materials (electronic insulators,
semiconductors, and metals). From the ionic and electronic transport properties of the resulting
composites, design rules will be derived to guide the development of highly efficient mixed ionic and
electronic conductors. This nanocomposite platform will be further developed to resolve fundamental
questions to guide the development of advanced battery and electrochromic device electrodes.
Nanocomposite electronic materials will be then developed for applications in physics, chemistry and
biology.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
39
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Viscosity and equation of state of hot and dense QCD matter
Dr. Denes Molnar, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
At the extremes of temperature and density, such as those that occurred during the early
Universe, ordinary matter dissolves into its constituent quarks and gluons, creating a new state of
matter called the quark‐gluon plasma. One of today's main experimental efforts is collide energetic
heavy ions with each other to create this new state of matter. This matter behaves like a fluid with very
low viscosity, and theory should be able to verify predictions of its thermodynamic and transport
properties, such as its equation of state and shear viscosity. However, major simplifications and
shortcomings in current theoretical approaches prevent obtaining reliable constraints from the data.
This work will significantly advance the theoretical description of collision dynamics through
developments in covariant transport, causal viscous hydrodynamics, and the interface between these
two approaches. The result will be the determination of the viscosity and equation of state off hot and
dense quark‐gluon matter with unprecedented accuracy from data obtained at present and future
facilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
40
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
New Experiments to Measure the Neutrino Mass Scale
Dr. Benjamin Monreal, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
After eighty years of study, much is known about the neutrino's three family structure, its
handedness, and fundamental role in the particle zoo. While the mass differences between neutrino
types are known, the absolute masses themselves are not known. This project will make two major
efforts at such a measurement: the European‐American KATRIN experiment currently being fabricated
and Project 8, a concept that shows promise for a very sensitive measurement. KATRIN will measure the
effect of the neutrino mass on the rare end‐point electrons in tritium beta decay; this experiment will
have sensitivity to a neutrino mass of 0.2 eV. The Project 8 concept will exploit the very week
microwaves emitted by low energy electrons as they traverse a strong magnetic field. This project will
provide interdisciplinary research and a laboratory scale proof‐of‐principle for a possible neutrino mass
measurement with a sensitivity down to about 0.05 eV.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
41
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Physics Analysis of Microwave Imaging Data from DIIID & KSTAR
Dr. Tobin Munsat, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
The aim of this effort is to use advanced data analysis techniques to improve our fundamental
understanding of turbulence and transport in tokamak plasmas. The research project will perform
analysis of the core and edge plasma in the DIII‐D and KSTAR tokamaks using data from the electron
cyclotron emission imaging (ECEI) and microwave imaging reflectometry (MIR) diagnostic systems and a
suite of original analysis algorithms. These diagnostics provide two dimensional images of temperature
and density fluctuations in the tokamak plasma and the data is now detailed enough to challenge the
most advanced computational models. Theory proposes that small‐scale turbulence is a primary cause
of anomalous thermal and particle transport in tokamak plasmas and advanced analysis of the spectral
and velocity characteristics of these data holds the key to understanding the basic physics. Highly
developed methods will be used for image interpretation, spectral analysis, wavelet‐based processing,
and velocity field analysis. The work will provide the critical link between theoretical models of
turbulence behavior and experimental observation.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
42
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Integrated Analysis of Particle Interactions at Hadron Colliders
Dr. Pavel Nadolsky, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, TX 75205
The objective of this project is to develop theoretical methods to help improve our knowledge
about the internal structure of protons and other strongly interacting particles. Theoretically, the
internal structure is coded into a set of parameters called the parton distribution functions. Detailed
knowledge about these functions is necessary for proper interpretation of the data from high‐energy
collision experiments that probe the fundamental properties of matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
43
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Overcoming Photometric Redshift Systematics in Dark Energy Experiments
Dr. Jeffrey Newman, Assistant Professor
Physics and Astronomy Department
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
There are many operating or proposed experiments to study the mysterious Dark Energy
pervading the universe which rely on estimates of the distances of astrophysical objects based only on
their observed colors in imaging (commonly called "photometric redshifts"). However, any bias in the
mean or scatter of these measurements must be extremely small (below 3 parts in 1000) for these
projects' sensitivity to the properties of Dark Energy not to be overwhelmed by systematic errors in the
photometric redshift. No calibration technique employed so far has come close to this limit; addressing
this issue is one of the top priorities for future experiments, ranging from the Dark Energy Survey to LSST
and JDEM. The PI has recently developed a new method of calibrating photometric redshifts which can
avoid both the astrophysical systematics and spectroscopic requirements of current techniques. Using
detailed studies of currently available datasets, this proposal will establish whether this method can in
fact meet the stringent calibration requirements for future Dark Energy experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
44
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Templating of Liquid Crystal Microstructures by Reversible Addition‐Fragmentation Chain Transfer
Polymerization
Dr. Jennifer O'Donnell, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
The goal of this project is to develop the fundamental knowledge necessary for the design and
synthesis of chemically and mechanically robust, internally‐structured polymer nanoparticles. This
research will focus on the underpinning science needed to make polymer nanoparticles with a
predetermined internal structure. The project combines theory and chemical synthesis with
characterization tools available at Ames Laboratory and neutron scattering at Oak Ridge National Lab.
The knowledge will enhance our understanding of how to manipulate matter at the nanoscale and could
impact the development of nanoreactors, bioelectrodes and sensors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
45
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Integrative Molecular and Microanalytical Studies of Syntrophic Partnerships Linking C, S, and N Cycles
in Anoxic Environments
Dr. Victoria Orphan, Assistant Professor of Geobiology
Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences
California institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
The objective of this research is to improve understanding of anaerobic methane oxidation (a
potent greenhouse gas) by microbes, a globally significant biogeochemical process. Anaerobic methane
oxidation results in the consumption of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, in numerous anoxic
environments and is thought to have potentially global climate significance as a biogeochemical carbon
cycle pathway. This research will focus on a metabolic partnership between sulfate‐reducing bacteria
and methane‐oxidizing archaea that allows metabolism of methane for energy under anoxic conditions.
The work emphasizes the optimization of new technologies for visualization of interactions between the
partner organisms at the level of single microbial cells and the tracking of joint metabolic processes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
46
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Self‐Consistent Calculations of Pedestal Structure Modification by 3D Fields in Tokamaks
Dr. Jong‐Kyu Park, Staff Physicist
Experimental Division
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
Princeton, NJ 0
The objective of this research is to use advanced, state‐of‐the‐art computational tools to
understand off‐symmetry breaking of the magnetic fields. Tokamaks are the most successful fusion
devices and a critical feature that is central to their high performance is the symmetry of the magnetic
field in the toroidal direction. However, in recent years experiments have uncovered the unexpected
result that very small amounts of symmetry breaking in the magnetic field at the edge of the tokamak
plasma can have surprising positive effects through the mitigation of damaging plasma instabilities.
Because of this mitigation, the symmetry breaking has become a very important topic for the next
generation of fusion devices such as ITER. A central part of the effort to understand this unexpected
benefit from symmetry breaking is the development of methods of calculating the new plasma
equilibrium in the presence of small symmetry breaking perturbations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
47
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
ReveR‐SES: Reversible Software Execution Systems
Dr. Kalyan Perumalla, Senior Research Staff Member and Research and Development Manager
Modeling and Simulation Group
Computational Sciences and Engineering Division
Computing and Computational Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The objective of this project is to develop novel software tools for increasing the efficiency and
usability of codes on extreme‐scale computing systems. The research will pursue new approaches for
high‐performance computing on extreme‐scale systems. Challenges to high‐performance include the
high costs of coordination and synchronization on systems with potentially one million or more
processor cores. This research effort is based on the development and use of a so‐called reversible
software execution paradigm that enables extreme‐scale computations to proceed, but with the ability
to dynamically detect and recover from transient hardware faults and other errors that are likely to
occur in computing systems of extreme complexity.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
48
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Ultrafast electron transport across nonogaps in nanowire circuits
Dr. Eric Potma, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
The objective of this project is to overcome the experimental challenges that have held back
ultrafast, time‐resolved optical experiments on single molecules. By zooming in on ultrafast timescales
at which molecular motions are coupled to moving charges, the findings will ultimately guide the design
of electronics components of relevance to many facets of energy generation and utilization, including
solar energy conversion and energy storage. Detailed knowledge of how molecular structure relates to
conductivity and charge storage is imperative to the design of devices at the level of a single molecule,
and includes an understanding of how molecular orbitals participate in the electron transport, which
structural changes occur during molecular charging, and what timescales are important for these
processes. To this end, the field of molecular electronics will be combined with ultrafast microscopy to
study electron transport in single molecules at ultrafast time scales.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
49
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Spatial and Temporal Proteomics for Characterizing Protein Dynamics and Posttranslational
Modifications
Dr. Wei‐Jun Qian, Senior Research Scientist
Biological Separations & Mass Spectrometry Group
Biological Sciences Division
Fundamental Computational and Science Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
This project aims to develop a suite of quantitative proteomics technologies that enable
spatially‐resolved measurements of subcellular protein abundance changes and the dynamics of
posttranslational modifications in environmental eukaryotes to gain understanding of the regulation of
cellular function. The research will integrate subcellular fractionation, posttranslational modifications,
and quantitative proteomics technologies to establish a general approach for enabling spatial and
temporal proteomics. The effectiveness and utility of these technologies for biological applications will
be demonstrated using the filamentous fungus Aspergillus niger, an organism that plays an important
role in biofuel production and global carbon cycling, to attain a better understanding of how its
morphology is regulated. The unique suite of technologies will have broad application in diverse studies
of microbial and plant organisms and in systems biology studies aimed at better understanding of
cellular machineries. Such capabilities not only provide core value for current systems biology efforts,
but they also add unique datasets for refining gene models, genome annotation, and future predictive
modeling.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
50
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Consolidating Biomass Pretreatment with Saccharification by Resolving the Spatial Control
Mechanisms of Fungi
Dr. Jonathan Schilling, Assistant Professor
Department of Bioproducts and Biosystems Engineering
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
The aim of this project is to characterize enzymatic mechanisms used by brown rot fungi to
degrade woody biomass. The research will examine the enzymatic mechanisms used by Postia placenta,
a brown rot fungus, to degrade woody biomass, since this fungus has already "developed" its own
solution to the efficient use of lignocellulose for energy production. In particular, the work will address
potential spatial partitioning of delignification reactions used by fungi to prepare the wood for digestion
from final enzymatic deconstruction of cellulose, a natural analogue to the separate steps used in
industrial biomass treatment processes. A combination of physical characterization of partially digested
wood samples, microscopic examination of the wood/fungus interface, and analysis of gene expression
will be used to address the study questions. The aim of the work is provide new mechanistic
understanding of fungal processes that could be used to develop new approaches to consolidated,
industrial bioprocessing for biofuels production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
51
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Understanding Jets at the Large Hadron Collider
Dr. Matthew Schwartz, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 2138
The objective of this project is to develop new theoretical methods to help improve our
understanding of the properties of particle jets that are produced in high‐energy collisions. There is also
a relatively new area of research on jet substructure that tries to identify characteristics of jets that
allows one to distinguish jets produced by known particles from those produced by unknown new
particles. Improved knowledge about jets and jet substructure will be very important for correctly
interpreting the data from high energy experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
52
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Enhancing the LHC Discovery Potential with Jets,
Missing ET, and bit ‐tagging Physics Signature Reconstruction in
ATLAS
Dr. Ariel Schwartzman, Assistant Professor
ATLAS Department
Particle Physics and Astrophysics Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
One of the most important signatures in searches for new physics beyond the Standard Model
at the LHC are events consisting of missing transverse energy (ET) and multiple jets originating from
bottom or top (b/t) quarks. The PI intends to continue developing an optimized capability that utilizes
the integrated capability of all ATLAS detector systems to enhance overall performance. Given the
broad range of physics analyses that will benefit from improved jets, missing ET and b/t‐jet tagging, the
results of this research will impact most of the LHC physics program. The search for new physics in
events rich in heavy flavor quarks (b/t) will help shed light on some of the most important questions in
particle physics today, such as the structure of the electroweak symmetry breaking (Higgs boson), the
hierarchy problem (neutrino mixing) and the origin of dark matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
53
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Origin of Superconductivity in Structurally Layered Materials
Dr. Athena Sefat, Wigner Fellow
Correlated Electron Materials Group
Materials Science and Technology Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The goal of this project is to understand the fundamental mechanisms that produce
superconductivity at high temperatures in structurally layered materials. The work will be focused on
materials design and synthesis but will also include significant efforts in theoretical calculations and
neutron scattering. Superconducting materials have the potential to impact a variety of energy relevant
technologies, including power generation and transmission, particularly if materials can be found that
can carry more current and operate at higher temperatures. Ultimately this research could lead to the
discovery of new superconductors with superior properties compared to current materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
54
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Catalyst Biomimics: A Novel Approach in Catalyst Design
Dr. Wendy Shaw, Senior Research Scientist
Catalysis Science Group
Institute for Interfacial Catalysis
Chemical and Materials Science Division
Fundamental and Computational Sciences Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
The objective of this project is to develop rationally designed proton channels for artificial
homogeneous catalysts following principles derived from natural enzyme catalysis. Proton shuttling
across or out of organic and/or inorganic molecules is fundamental to a number of energy‐relevant
reactions, such as hydrocarbon oxidation or hydrogenation and hydrogen production or water splitting.
Using energy‐minimized computational models of catalysts and reaction pathways, primary and
secondary ligands to transition metal catalysts will be rationally designed to promote enhanced reaction
rates for that type of reactions; molecular enzyme‐mimic catalysts will then be synthesized and
characterized; and uses of those novel catalysts in energy conversion and storage reactions will be
explored.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
55
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Supersymmetry Breaking, Gauge Mediation and the LHC
Dr. David Shih, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
New Brunswick, NJ 8901
The objective of this project is to advance theoretical understanding of a class of models that
may provide a consistent framework to address how elementary particles acquire their mass. This class
of models invokes a new symmetry called supersymmetry which has to be broken in some way at low
energies. There are several proposed mechanisms for supersymmetry breaking. This project will focus
on what is known as the gauge‐mediation mechanism. Supersymmetric models suggest possible dark
matter candidates and new particles that may be produced in hadron colliders such as the Tevatron and
the LHC. This project will examine the phenomenological consequences of models with gauge‐mediated
supersymmetry breaking to aid the search for evidence of such models in collider and dark matter
experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
56
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Advancing our Understanding of Photonic Band Gap Structures for Accelerators
Dr. Evgenya Smirnova, Scientist IV
ISR‐6
High Power Electrodynamics
International Space and Response Division
Global Security Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The objective of this research is to advance photonic‐band‐gap (PBG) accelerator technology to
a stage where it can be used in future particle accelerators for high energy physics or other science
applications. In conventional accelerating structures, intense particle beams can excite undesired states
in the structure ‐‐ called higher‐order modes (HOMs) ‐‐ that in turn disrupt the beam. PBG structures,
however, can be designed to contain the desired accelerating mode while transmitting HOMs out of the
structure for disposal. Using PBG structures in particle accelerators could enable progress to
significantly higher beam intensities, leading to a completely new generation of accelerator
technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
57
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Advanced High Heat Flux Divertor Program on the National Spherical Torus Experiment
Dr. Vsevolod Soukhanovskii, Physicist
DIII‐D Group, Fusion Energy Program
Physics Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Science and Technology Principal Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The objective of this research is to investigate advanced divertor solutions, including the
"snowflake" divertor configuration on the National Spherical Torus Experiment (NSTX). One of the grand
challenges for magnetic fusion energy research is to develop innovative plasma‐material interface
solutions for high heat and particle fluxes incident on the first wall and divertor. To address this critical
research gap, the project will entail an experimental and modeling program to investigate advanced
divertor solutions including the "snowflake" divertor configuration on the National Spherical Torus
Experiment (NSTX). The project is a study of divertor heat and particle transport in these advanced
configurations, and prototype magnetic control and radiative divertor performance optimization with
feedback. With the help of Thomson scattering diagnostic system for divertor electron temperature and
density measurements, kinetic and multi‐fluid one and two‐dimensional transport models of the
advanced configurations will be validated. Studying the high heat flux handling divertor solutions on
NSTX and NSTX Upgrade will facilitate extrapolations to future spherical tokamak‐based nuclear devices
and tokamaks beyond International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), the international
fusion research project.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
58
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Separating Algorithm and Implementation via Programming Model Injection (SAIMI)
Dr. Michelle Strout, Assistant Professor
Computer Science Department
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80523
The goal of this effort is to improve the programmability of extreme‐scale computing systems,
resulting in increased portability and transparency. The research will address the challenges of
developing portable, high‐performance scientific software for next‐generation computing systems.
These goals will be accomplished by developing a programming model that enables scientists to focus
on algorithm development rather than the implementation details. This project will develop high‐level
scheduling abstractions, including the mapping of computation to processors; storage mapping
abstractions; abstractions for scheduling how computation accesses data; and similar abstractions for
programming models such as sparse computations, task graph computations, and look‐up tables.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
59
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Technology Development Toward Very High‐Gradient and High Quality‐Factor Superconducting RF
Cavities
Dr. Tsuyoshi Tajima, Research and Development Engineer 4 and Team Leader
Mechanical Design and Engineering Group
Accelerator Operations and Technology Division
Engineering and Engineering Sciences Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The goal of this research is to produce a prototype multi‐cell superconducting radiofrequency
(SRF) cavity for particle accelerators that generates an accelerating gradient of 100 megavolts/meter
(MV/m) or higher with a quality factor of 2E+10 or higher. Current niobium technology used in SRF
cavities has a theoretical limit of 50‐60 MV/m, and a new technology needs to be developed for
advanced accelerators. This project will use a thin film technology to achieve the improvement taking
advantage of the phenomenon that the lower critical field is increased for a thin‐film superconductor
material. If successful, the new cavity technology will enable smaller, more energy‐efficient and cost‐
effective particle accelerators.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
60
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Early‐Late Heterobimetallic Complexes Linked by Phosphinoamide Ligands: Tuning Redox Potentials &
Small Molecule Activation
Dr. Christine Thomas, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 2454
The goal of this project is to increase our understanding of how interactions between early and
late transition metals can be used as a strategy to control chemical transformations related to the clean
production of fuels. Energy‐efficient conversion of abundant small molecules such as CO2 and H2O into
liquid fuels is both scientifically challenging and strategically important for society. Hetero‐bimetallic
complexes (of, for example, Co and Zr) where one metal is strongly acidic and the other strongly basic
possess polar bonds and unusual reactivities. Such bimetallic interaction can be tuned and stabilized by
means of phophino‐amide ligands. Using complexes designed and synthesized at the molecular level,
this project will generate better understanding of structure‐activity relations and will lead to catalysts
for low‐temperature activation of CO2, O2, H2, and N2 and their conversion into liquid fuel precursors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
61
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Linking Plant Stress, Biogenic SOA, and CCN Production ‐ A New Feedback in the Climate System?
Dr. Timothy VanReken, Asssistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99164
The goal of this project is to improve understanding of how biogenic, volatile organic compound
(VOC) emissions affect the climate system. The research aims to significantly improve our
understanding of how biogenic VOC emissions influence secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation and
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) production. There is particular focus on the SOA formation potential
of real plant emissions, how the SOA formation potential changes in response to climate‐induced plant
stress and how biogenic SOA contributes to cloud condensation nuclei activity. The research is
characterized by laboratory experiments on select tree species to determine how SOA formation is
affected by emissions changes arising from plant stress, field experiments to determine how such SOA
formation is affected by conditions in a natural forest, field observations of aerosol properties in a
variety of environments, and studies to connect SOA formation to cloud condensation nuclei activity.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
62
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Diffusion on Complex Networks: Algorithmic Foundations
Dr. Anil Vullikanti, Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, VA 24060
The aim of this effort is to develop the mathematical and computational foundations for
improving the robustness of complex network systems. The research addresses important
mathematical and computational issues arising in the analysis of complex phenomena within extreme‐
scale network systems ‐ such as the cascade of failures in a blackout across an electric power grid; the
propagation of malware in wireless networks; the spread of an epidemic within social contact networks.
This effort is motivated by the goal of fundamentally understanding the robustness of such complex
systems in a systematic manner. Algorithms to detect vulnerabilities and improve robustness are
investigated in order to address key concerns for network and policy planners. Realistic models and
scalable, efficient simulation tools will be developed for understanding diffusion processes within
complex network systems of importance to the Department of Energy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
63
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Control Graphene Electronic Structure for Energy Technology
Dr. Feng Wang, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
The goal of this research project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the electronic
structure and the novel electrical, vibrational, and optical behavior of grapheme, a one‐atom thick sheet
of carbon that exhibits incredible structural flexibility, electrical transport, and optical properties. This
understanding and control would enable the development of a number of novel graphene based devices
that will impact a broad range of energy technologies ranging from thermal energy converters and low
power electronics to fuel cells and solar energy harvesting.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
64
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Exploring New Physics Beyond the Standard Model
Dr. Lian‐Tao Wang, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 8544
The objective of this project is to explore new theoretical models that may lead to interesting
signals in high‐energy collision experiments and for developing techniques to help identify such signals
from the data. It is widely expected that new physics beyond the Standard Model of particles exists
around the TeV energy scale. However, it is anybody's guess what this new physics will turn out to be.
This creates a serious challenge on what signals to look for in a given experiment. An important outcome
of this project will be a set of search strategies that will increase our chance of finding new physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
65
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Methods for Decision Under Technological Change Uncertainty and Risk Assessment for Integrated
Assessment (IA) of Climate Change
Dr. Mort Webster, Assistant Professor
Engineering Systems Division
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 2139
The objective of this effort is to improve the way that technology and uncertainty are
represented and treated in integrated assessment models (IAMs) of the coupled human‐climate system.
The research project will address key gaps in representing technological change and the treatment of
risk and uncertainty within IAMs. Integrated Assessment Models contribute to our understanding of
many issues in climate change, such as the development of internally consistent global emission
scenarios and the exploration of economic, technological, emissions, and climate impacts of alternative
mitigation strategies. Specific elements of this work will also contribute to improving the spatial and
temporal resolution of IAMs for understanding climate impacts. The research will advance methods in
three critical areas: 1) modeling of climate mitigation as sequential decisions under uncertainty, 2)
modeling of uncertainty in technological change that represents structural uncertainty and 3) design of
reduced‐form models of complex earth systems processes to improve the ability to analyze the risks of
climate change.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
66
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Chemical Control of Charge Trapping and Charge Transfer Processes at the Organic‐Inorganic Interface
within Quantum Dot‐Organic Complexes
Dr. Emily Weiss, Assistant Professor
Chemistry Department
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
The objective of this project is to understand and control nanoscale structures for solar energy
conversion. This research will pursue a fundamental understanding of how charge flows in and out of
nanoscale spherical structures within hybrid organic and inorganic environments. The unique quantum
behavior of light absorption in nanometer‐sized spheres will be coupled with the chemistry of charge
transfer to form the cornerstone of next generation solar cells with power conversion efficiencies that
exceed present limitations. The research represents a unique combination of materials preparation,
state‐of‐the‐art instrumental analysis, and theoretical design and calculation.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
67
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Theoretical Investigation of Nucleon Structure
Dr. Feng Yuan, Physicist Division Fellow
Nuclear Theory Group
Nuclear Science Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
One focus of fundamental research in sub‐atomic physics is the spin and gluonic structure of the
nucleon. These studies are driving forces for experimental programs in these areas, and are key
questions in current hadronic physics. This research will investigate nucleon structure, by developing
the necessary theoretical framework and phenomenological techniques. The project will apply
important aspects of perturbative Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) theory, such as gauge invariance
and QCD factorization, to extract the relevant nucleon structure from the various experiments. The
studies will focus on important issues such as the difference and relevance of proton spin sum rules, and
improving the description of transverse spin phenomena with the goal to extract information about the
orbital angular momentum contribution to the nucleon spin.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
68
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2010
Measurement of Parity Violation in Deep Inelastic Scattering and Studies of the Nucleon Spin
Structure at Jlab 6 and 11 GeV
Dr. Xiaochao Zheng, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
This project will focus on two thrusts of nuclear science, a test of the Standard Model using
measurements of the parity‐violating asymmetry in deep inelastic scattering (PVDIS) of polarized
electrons on deuterium, and the study of spin observables to address the structure of the nucleon. The
project will conduct an exploratory PVDIS experiment using the 6 GeV electron beam at the Jefferson
Laboratory that will provide the first precision data on selected coupling constants of the Standard
Model. In addition, the project will develop a new large acceptance spectrometer called SoLID to be
used with 11 GeV electron beams available by 2015 for both the PVDIS experiments and the study of the
spin observables.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
69
