DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Diagonalization Solvers for Electronic Collective Phenomena in Nanoscience
Dr. Gonzalo Alvarez‐Campot, Research and Development Staff Scientist
Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences
Computer Science and Mathematics Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
This project aims to advance theoretical modeling capabilities to understand collective
phenomena at the nanoscale in strongly correlated electronic materials, including Mott insulators and
high temperature superconductors, through the use of the density matrix renormalization group
(DMRG). Studies will focus on (1) the time‐dependent electron transport in Mott insulators (e.g., copper
oxides), particularly on nano‐patterned structures; (2) the temperature dependence of the collective
orders, including charge, spin and orbital orders, of superconductors and correlation with critical
temperature; and (3) combining dynamical mean‐field theory with DMRG to study emergent
phenomena at the nanoscale and nanoscale inhomogeneities in high‐temperature superconductors.
Fundamental understanding of both the correlated behavior of conduction electrons and the interaction
between electrons and lattices in these materials, in which the "standard one‐electron model" of metals
breaks down, can provide insights for the development of new materials and structures with enhanced
functionality for solar cells, solid‐state lighting, and superconductor power transmission. Computer
codes will be made accessible to the scientific community as part of the user‐driven program at the
Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
1
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Templated Bottom‐Up Synthesis of Semiconducting and Nanostructured Graphene Materials
Dr. Michael Arnold, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
The objective of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of how nanostructured
graphene materials can be rationally synthesized from the bottom up with atomic precision and
exceptional properties. The research will focus on studying the nucleation and kinetics of graphene
growth in confined patterns and channels, controlling the crystallinity of the graphene materials, and
learning the mechanisms that determine the atomic ordering at their edges. The understanding that is
gained will result in novel high‐performance materials that could impact a number of energy
technologies of national importance including low‐energy semiconductor electronics, the efficient
generation of electricity from solar and infrared light, and the high‐density storage of energy in
batteries.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
2
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Spatially Resolved Ionic Diffusion and Electrochemical Reactions in Solids: A Biased View at Lithium
Ion Batteries
Dr. Nina Balke, Associate Research Staff Member
Imaging Functionality Group
Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The overarching goal of this project is to understand the ionic diffusion and electrochemical
reactions in Lithium‐ion batteries from the length scale of single microstructural elements to the
macroscopic device level. A novel Electrochemical Strain Microscopy (ESM) probe with 100 fold better
resolution than other probes will be used along with electrical and structural battery characterization
techniques for macroscopic devices in combination with advanced theoretical modeling. The research
will shine light on the complex interplay of ionic and electronic transport in battery materials and their
correlation with the structural material properties. This will result in new tools to characterize energy
storage materials and enhance the fundamental understanding of the nanoscale processes that define a
battery.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
3
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
In situ Measurements of Heterogeneous Reactions on Ambient Aerosol Particles: Impacts on
Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate
Dr. Timothy Bertram, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
Heterogeneous reactions, occurring between gases and aerosol particles, alter the climate‐
relevant properties of aerosols and catalyze reaction processes that are energetically unfavorable in the
gas phase. The objective of this project is to identify the mechanistic drivers that control the variability
in heterogeneous aerosol processes through direct in situ measurement of reaction kinetics on ambient
aerosol particles. The heterogeneous reactivity of complex, ambient aerosol particles will be
investigated to determine: (1) how laboratory investigations of heterogeneous processes conducted on
model, simple systems represent the real atmosphere, (2) the impact of heterogeneous processes on
ambient particle hygroscopicity and optical properties, and (3) the uptake kinetics for a host of
atmospheric trace gases as a function of particle composition and phase. The results of these
investigations will be used to directly improve the representation of heterogeneous processes in global
climate models.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
4
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Towards Predictive Simulations of Soot Formation: From Surrogate to Turbulence
Dr. Guillaume Blanquart, Assistant Professor
Mechanical Engineering Department
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
The aim of this project is to fill the gap in the present understanding and modeling of soot
formation both in laminar and turbulent flames. The project focuses on the combustion of surrogate
fuels comprised of several chemical species in contrast to current single‐species models. A current state‐
of‐the‐art chemical model will be extended with additional components often found in surrogates. The
inner structure of soot particles will be investigated as a means to gain insight into soot inception,
growth, and oxidation via the development of a nested hierarchy approach combining Quantum
Chemistry, Molecular Dynamics, and Monte Carlo simulations. The newly improved chemical and soot
models will be incorporated in Direct Numerical Simulations of turbulent sooting flames and validated in
turbulent jet diffusion flames. The outcome is expected to be a major leap in the development of
predictive models for the combustion of transportation fuels, the formation/oxidation of soot, and Large
Eddy Simulations. The impact of the research goes far beyond soot formation. It is relevant to the
formation of all other nanoparticles (SiO , TiO , and AlO ) as well as other slowly evolving processes in
2 2 3
turbulent flows (CO, NO ).
x
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
5
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Energetics of Radiation Tolerant Nanoceramics
Dr. Ricardo Castro, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
Nanostructured materials are likely to play a large role in future nuclear reactors and radioactive
waste storage due to their strength and potential resistance to structural damage from radiation.
However, this potential is hindered by significant gaps in the understanding of interfaces’ properties and
their role in the overall performance of the nanocrystalline structures. The lack of reliable
thermodynamical data of nanomaterials makes it extremely difficult to predict and fully exploit
nanomaterials’ properties in high‐radiation environments, which is one reason the stability of the
nanomaterials is still a big unresolved question. The goal of this project is to investigate two nano‐scale
materials [the aluminate based spinels (MAl O , M = Mg, Ni, or Zn), and zirconia based materials (ZrO
2 4 2
doped with Mg, Y, or Ca)], and establish the link between composition, interface thermodynamics, and
radiation resistance to enable a better understanding of the nature of enhanced performance in
nanocrystalline ceramics. Thereafter, we will exploit the achieved knowledge as a foundation to design a
new nanocomposite ceramic capable of withstanding high radiation exposition by using elements of
interface engineering on a thermodynamic basis.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
6
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Rigid Biopolymer Nanocrystal Systems for Controlling Multicomponent Nanoparticle Assembly and
Orientation in Thin Film Solar Cells
Dr. Jennifer Cha, Assistant Professor
Department of NanoEngineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
This project seeks to direct the assembly of nanoparticles into three‐dimensional crystals of any
desired configuration and crystallographic orientation using tunable DNA interactions. Despite the
wealth of nanoscale materials that may benefit many current and future solid state technologies,
difficulties in controlling and directing their placement and orientation into desired architectures has led
to significant impediments in their applicability. Biological systems can form such structures using their
inherent molecular information as guides to assemble organic and inorganic materials into highly
organized structures ordered at multiple length scales. Using bio‐inspired strategies, the research will
control the two‐ and three‐dimensional arrangement of semiconductor nanocrystals into a seed layer
that can nucleate successive layers of single nanocrystals with long‐range order and tunable
crystallographic orientations. This work will elucidate how particle‐DNA interactions influence
nanoparticle crystallographic orientation, how nanoparticles on patterned arrays of biomolecules can
nucleate long‐range order, and how to synthesize 2‐ and 3‐D superlattice arrays of DNA conjugated
semiconductor nanocrystals.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
7
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Prediction of Thermal Transport Properties of Materials with Microstructural Complexity
Dr. Youping Chen, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
This project will focus on overcoming the major obstacle standing in the way of progress in
dynamic multiscale simulation, the lack of a concurrent multiscale method that allows elastic waves,
heat and defects to pass through the atomistic‐continuum interface. This project aims to (1) establish a
concurrently coupled atomistic‐continuum methodology that can overcome this obstacle and that can
be used to design and optimize materials with microstructural complexity for desired properties and (2)
demonstrate the methodology through predicting the mechanical and thermal transport properties of
thermoelectric materials and comparing the predictions with experimental measurements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
8
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Search for Holographic Noise from the Planck Scale
Dr. Aaron Chou, Associate Scientist and Wilson Fellow
Experimental Particle Physics
Particle Physics Division
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL 60510
This grant will enable the construction and operation of the Fermilab Holometer, the world’s
most sensitive microscope for detecting tiny spatial position jitter, correlated between neighboring
objects. The holometer is a new, modest‐scale double Michelson interferometer device, optimized to
isolate and measure a recently predicted position noise spectrum arising from a Planck scale information
bound implied by the holographic principle in black hole thermodynamics. Very few probes of quantum
effects at the Planck scale are known, and the present search for holographic noise represents one of
the most cost effective ways to probe this extremely high energy scale. Should the holometer
successfully detect the predicted noise spectrum, this detection will represent a first glimpse of the
microphysics controlling the fundamental structure of space and time. The nature of this new physics
can be elucidated with reconfigurations of the holometer and eventually with more elaborate future
devices. If no exotic noise is detected, even at levels well below the predicted magnitude, a set of
theoretical ideas of Planck scale information encoding will have been put to rest. In either case, the
holometer represents a rare and valuable probe of Planck scale microphysics and may answer some
profound questions about our possibly holographic reality.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
9
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Natural and Primary Catalysts for Molten Cellulose Pyrolysis to Targeted Bio‐oils
Dr. Paul Dauenhauer, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
The use of lignocellulosic biomass as an alternative reduced‐carbon feedstock processed within
high temperature thermo‐chemical catalytic reactors is hindered by a limited fundamental
understanding of the role of catalysts that naturally exist within biomass. The natural catalysts of
biomass including the inorganic ions necessary for biological function as well as the oxides obtained
from soils have been shown to exhibit significant influence during pyrolysis. The objective of this
research is to study the catalytic chemistry of naturally occurring inorganic materials within high‐
temperature molten carbohydrates to understand their effect on the selection of volatile organics and
gases produced during pyrolysis. The role of inorganic catalysts on biopolymer decomposition within
the high temperature (> 400 °C), intermediate condensed phase will be interpreted through a targeted
study of specific molten carbohydrate reactions including ether hydrolysis, retro‐aldol condensation,
and dehydration, which select for the competing catalytic pathways of product formation. The reaction
intermediates and oxidation state of natural catalysts within the molten liquid will be characterized with
the use of a new experimental liquid sampling technique capable of extracting and quenching molten
carbohydrate/catalyst mixtures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
10
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Taus and the Trigger for Discovery at ATLAS
Dr. Sarah Demers, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN brings a new energy frontier to collider physics with
exciting opportunities for discovery. This work focuses on the search for the Higgs boson in the ATLAS
(A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) experiment and takes advantage of the channels with an enhanced coupling
of Higgs to tau leptons. Tau leptons, as members of the least‐explored 3rd generation and as the most
massive leptons, play an important role in many new physics searches. The discovery of the Standard
Model (SM) Higgs boson, the supersymmetric charged and neutral Higgs bosons, a theorized Z’ boson,
or a heavy 4th generation neutrino can depend primarily on decays involving tau leptons in many
possible scenarios where the coupling of the new physics to tau leptons is enhanced over couplings to
electrons and muons. This work will optimize the reach of the ATLAS experiment toward discovering
new physics by taking full advantage of event signatures with hadronically decaying tau leptons and
maximizing the efficiency of the tau lepton trigger.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
11
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
In‐Situ TEM Observations of Degradation Mechanisms in Next‐Generation High‐Energy Density
Lithium‐Ion Battery Systems
Dr. Shen Dillon, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana‐Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
This project seeks to characterize nanoscale processes associated with the degradation of next‐
generation high energy density lithium‐ion battery electrodes via in‐situ transmission electron
microscopy. Dynamic processes active in the electrodes, electrolyte, and intervening interfaces, which
are chemical, electrical, and mechanical in nature, have been correlated with capacity fade in lithium ion
batteries. However, without direct in‐situ observation of these degradation mechanisms with high
spatial and temporal resolution, it remains difficult to understand and predict how these processes
initiate, propagate, and interact. This research will develop the experimental techniques necessary for
investigating electrochemical systems by in‐situ transmission electron microscopy and will provide a
framework for distinguishing and limiting electron‐beam effects that could potentially influence
experimental results. This project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of degradation
mechanisms in representative environmental conditions using commercial electrolytes and electrode
designs that mimic commercial electrodes and in idealized solid‐state batteries that will enable in‐situ
atomic‐resolution imaging.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
12
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Electronic and Ionic Conductors from Ordered Microporous Materials
Dr. Mircea Dinca, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
This project aims to develop rational pathways towards the synthesis of ordered microporous
materials with tunable electron and ion transport properties. Two convergent approaches will be used.
In one, research will be carried out to modulate the electronic structure of nonconductive but highly
porous metal‐organic frameworks (MOFs). By combining the synthesis of electronically active bridging
ligands with rigorous topological design principles, a cluster‐directed approach towards porous and
conductive MOFs will be developed. In the same context, new topochemical ion metathesis reactions
are proposed for the synthesis of MOF‐based lithium and sodium ion conductors. The new MOF‐derived
materials will display unique, tunable multifunctional properties with potential impact in electrical
energy storage, electrocatalysis, and ionic conductors, among others.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
13
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
An Enabling Computational Framework for Uncertainty Assimilation and Propagation in Complex PDE
Systems: Sparse and Low‐Rank Techniques
Dr. Alireza Doostan, Assistant Professor
Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
This project aims to develop a set of new theories, algorithms, and computational tools that
enable ultra‐scalable representation and propagation of high‐dimensional uncertainties to circumvent
the issue of curse‐of‐dimensionality. The research components are motivated by the fact that highly
scalable algorithms are needed to achieve exascale performance for uncertainty quantification and
predictive simulation at extreme scales. Although these developments are generic and applicable to a
wide range of high‐dimensional, complex, stochastic, partial‐differential‐equation (PDE) systems, this
research effort will focus on predictive simulation of high‐energy‐density lithium batteries. To create
knowledge about the precise failure mechanisms of these batteries and ultimately predict their
performance and reliability, a truly data‐driven, multi‐scale, multi‐physics framework is needed that
allows studying (i) dominant sources of uncertainty in the governing physical models at all scales of
relevance and (ii) the interface between the interchanging physics and scales. The impact of the planned
mathematical and numerical advancements in prediction of high‐dimensional uncertain systems will be
broad across areas of engineering and science such as climate modeling, fusion energy, combustion, and
nanoscience, among others.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
14
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Meson Spectroscopy from Quantum Chromodynamics
Dr. Jozef Dudek, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA 23529
The basic building blocks of the atomic nucleus, protons and neutrons, are constructed from
quarks, bound together by gluons in such a way that they are never seen in isolation. Quarks and their
anti‐particles can also pair up in short‐lived states called mesons; the goal of this project is to predict the
theoretical properties of these mesons. Although we know the fundamental theory of quark and gluon
dynamics to be solved, “Quantum Chromodynamics” (QCD), exact mathematical solution of the theory
eludes us. Our best available tool for studying QCD is “Lattice QCD” (LQCD), a numerical solution of the
theory with controllable approximations. This research project will use novel LQCD techniques to predict
the masses and quantum numbers of mesons, their internal quark‐gluon structure, their decays into
other mesons, and their couplings to photons. A major emphasis will be the predicted properties of
“hybrid mesons,” hypothetical exotic particles in which the usual quark‐antiquark pair is accompanied
by an excitation of the gluon field that binds them. This project will complement a planned search for
hybrid mesons by the Gluonic Excitation Experiment (GlueX) at the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
15
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Engineering Robust Hosts for Microbial Biofuel Production
Dr. Mary Dunlop, Assistant Professor
School of Engineering
University of Vermont
Burlington, VT 05405
Microbes contain a vast diversity of metabolic pathways that can be subtly tweaked and
redesigned for the conversion of biomass to biofuels compounds. Next‐generation biofuels such as
short‐chain hydrocarbons are particularly attractive target molecules since they would be compatible
with existing engines and infrastructure. However, high levels of these compounds are often toxic to
the microbes synthesizing them, limiting the potential rate and yield of industrial biofuel production.
The objective of this research is to understand hydrocarbon tolerance mechanisms used by microbes
inhabiting natural hydrocarbon seeps or oil‐contaminated sites, searching genome sequences of these
organisms for efflux pumps and other molecular machines that microbes use to separate toxic
hydrocarbons from their delicate biological systems. Promising candidates will be introduced into
biofuel synthesizing strains of E. coli and tuned for optimal gene expression to determine if it is possible
to engineer strains with enhanced tolerance to hydrocarbons and improved efficiency of overall
synthesis.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
16
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Quantum Control of Spins in Diamond for Nanoscale Magnetic Sensing and Imaging
Dr. Gurudev Dutt, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
The goal of this research is to develop a magnetic field imaging technique with nanoscale
resolution that would allow for non‐invasive, non‐destructive probing of a variety of important physical
phenomena such as quantum tunneling in single molecule magnets and quantum bits encoded into
spins in quantum dots. Diamond single spin magnetic sensors are a highly promising material platform
featuring high magnetic field sensitivity, nanometer spatial resolution and the important ability to
operate under ambient or harsh environmental conditions required to study many material systems.
The proposed work will take a multi‐faceted approach toward improving the accuracy, sensitivity and
robustness of this platform through a unique combination of fundamental investigations into quantum
control and precision quantum metrology coupled tightly to innovative design, sophisticated nano‐
fabrication and advanced measurement techniques.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
17
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Large Dynamic Range Beam Diagnostics and Beam Dynamics Studies for HIgh Current Electron LINACs
Dr. Pavel Evtushenko, Accelerator Physicist
Free Electron Laser (FEL) Division
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
Newport News, VA 23606
The goal of this project is to advance the development of large‐scale LINAC (linear particle
accelerator) based fourth‐generation light sources with high average current by gaining an
understanding of electron beam halo formation processes and developing methods to control the halo.
The project aims to develop beam diagnostic techniques for characterization of the electron beam
parameters with dynamic range much higher than used now. One goal is the measurement of the
longitudinal and transverse phase space distribution with a dynamic range of about 106. Such
measurements will be used for experimental investigation of halo formation and its evolution through
the accelerator. Another goal is to develop beam optics solutions to control and manage the beam halo
such that it would not be a limiting factor for the next‐generation LINAC based light sources. The
program also aims to benchmark machine design codes in terms of their ability to describe the beam
halo evolution. It is envisioned that better understanding of halo formation and evolution will contribute
significantly to the performance of future light sources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
18
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Many‐body effects in transport and energy transfer
Dr. Michael Galperin, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
The goal of this project is development of theoretical approaches capable of treating open
molecular systems that are far from equilibrium. These include radiatively driven molecular electronic
devices, nanoscale motors, and molecular‐scale systems for control of chemical reactivity and energy
transfer. Many‐body effects, induced by electron‐electron, electron‐vibron, and excitonic interactions,
are essential in predicting the response of these systems to external stimuli (bias, gate voltage, light
sources). Although quantum chemistry has developed methods for dealing with correlated many‐
electron effects within the context of isolated molecules, ab initio calculations on open molecular
systems mostly employ methods formulated within an effective single‐electron picture. Approaches
developed within the project will introduce established methods of quantum chemistry into the realm of
molecular‐scale electron transfer. This will provide a solid background to treat molecular correlation
with high rigor (inaccessible by standard techniques in use today), incorporate molecular spectroscopy
and non‐adiabatic dynamics into the consideration, and develop practical schemes to account for
system‐bath correlations (e.g. Kondo effect). Developed schemes will be validated on simple models
and then developed into practical computational approaches for realistic simulations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
19
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Precision Physics and Searches with Top and Bottom Quarks
Dr. Aran Garcia‐Bellido, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
The aims of this project are (1) to measure with high precision how top quarks interact with
bottom quarks in the Standard Model of particle physics and (2) to search for new heavy particles that
decay into top and bottom quarks. We propose to use the large available data from Fermilab's Tevatron
proton‐antiproton collider and the high‐statistics data from CERN's Large Hadron Collider (LHC) proton‐
proton collider to comprehensively exploit the different production mechanisms and conditions in the
two colliders. Final states with top and bottom quarks provide a promising avenue to look for physics
beyond the Standard Model because top quarks can couple easily with new heavier particles or exhibit
anomalous couplings. Additionally, this project aims to develop new electronics to read out the light
signals from the hadronic calorimeter detector in the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
20
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Optical Manipulation and Detection of Emergent Phenomena in Topological Insulators
Dr. Nuh Gedik, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The goal of this project is to develop short‐pulse laser‐based experimental tools to probe the
ultra‐fast electron dynamics of topological insulators. Topological insulators exhibit a newly discovered
property of matter where surface electrons have exceptional conducting properties distinct from the
non‐conductive nature of the bulk insulator material. This project will develop advanced optical
spectroscopy along with electron spectroscopy and diffraction, all based on ultrafast laser pulses as the
initial excitation source. The techniques will be developed with the goal to observe the time‐resolved
signature of quantum interactions and order in topological insulator materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
21
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Extended MHD Modeling of Nonlinear Instabilities in Fusion Plasmas
Dr. Kai Germaschewski, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
The principal objective of this project is to computationally model global dynamics in fusion
plasmas. Tokamaks are the most promising devices for achieving sustained magnetic confinement of
fusion plasmas. Such plasmas are typically modeled using magnetohydrodynamics (MHD), which treats a
plasma as an electrically conducting fluid interacting with a self‐consistently generated magnetic field.
The interesting and relevant plasma regimes in these devices are weakly collisional, so it is important to
extend the resistive MHD model to take into account additional physics such as the effects of the Hall
current and electron pressure tensor, including anisotropic and off‐diagonal terms. This research will
apply extended MHD computational models to complex three‐dimensional geometries such as tokamak
and reversed‐field pinch (RFP) configurations. The goal is to investigate the nonlinear dynamics of
plasma instabilities in tokamaks and RFPs. Examples are the impact of toroidal coupling on the nonlinear
evolution of the m=1 Hall‐resistive kink instability in a tokamak, with potential secondary ballooning
instabilities, and the dynamo effects caused by Hall currents and vortical flows generated at multiple
unstable rational surfaces in an RFP. This work also has potential applications to space plasma physics
phenomena like, e.g., magnetospheric substorms. The project contains a substantial effort to verify and
validate extended fluid models by benchmarking with analytic theory and other computational codes, as
well as comparison to observations from fusion and magnetic reconnection plasma experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
22
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Interfacial Electrocatalytic Processes from First Principles
Dr. Jeffrey Greeley, Assistant Scientist
Theory and Modeling Group
Center for Nanoscale Materials
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
The objective of this research is to develop computational models for enhanced understanding
of chemical and physical processes at electrode/fluid interfaces. Many present and future energy and
environmental technologies, including electrocatalytic production of electricity, electrocatalytic
synthesis of fuels, pollution abatement, and energy storage and corrosion in metal air batteries, are
sensitively dependent on chemical and physical processes that occur at the boundary between solid
electrodes and liquid electrolytes. To understand these processes at an atomic level and to improve the
performance of the associated technologies, quantum chemical computational models are of
tremendous value. To develop such models for the formidably complex environments near solid‐
electrolyte interfaces, this project exploits the significant insights that may be gained from first‐
principles studies on analogous catalytic and physical processes at solid/gas interfaces. By combining
these models and insights with new descriptions of uniquely electrochemical effects, such as the
interaction of solvated charges with adsorbed catalytic species, the work will advance fundamental
understanding of chemical and physical processes at electrode surfaces. This understanding will
ultimately contribute to the continued development of technologies, ranging from fuel cells to batteries,
that depend on such fundamental knowledge.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
23
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Investigation of radiation damage tolerance in interface‐containing metallic nano structures
Dr. Julia Greer, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
The objective of this research is to obtain a fundamental understanding of interfaces in their
role as helium sinks in irradiated metallic microstructures. Radiation damage and the associated
production of helium in metals lead to degradation of a material's strength during the lifetime of nuclear
reactor components. The research will use a suite of nanoscale characterization and testing techniques,
as well as computational tools, to isolate and understand the effects of specific tailored interfaces and
deformation mechanisms on the degradation of material properties. The elucidation of these
mechanisms will give insight into the requirements for advanced materials for current and next‐
generation nuclear reactors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
24
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Understanding Photochemistry using Extreme Ultraviolet and Soft X‐Ray Time Resolved Spectroscopy
Dr. Markus Guehr, Senior Staff Scientist
PULSE Institute
Chemical Science Division
Photon Science Directorate
SLAC National Acceleratory Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Chemical reactions can be described as changes in the electron distribution of a molecule
leading to bond formation and cleavage. A complete understanding of a chemical reaction requires
monitoring the time‐evolving distribution of valence electrons and the complex interplay of the
electrons with the nuclei on their natural time and length scales. The experimental method planned for
this work will use ultrashort light pulses in the extreme ultraviolet and soft x‐ray spectral range. These
light probes deliver sub‐nanometer spatial resolution, femtosecond temporal resolution, and element
sensitivity. The experiments will be performed on organic molecules containing transition metals at
laboratory‐based laser high harmonic sources and at the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS). The results
of this research program will enable a better understanding of, and possibly control of, photocatalytic
reactions such as light‐harvesting at the level of electrons.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
25
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Search for Weakly Interacting Dark Matter with Liquid Xenon
Dr. Carter Hall, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
The nature of the mysterious dark matter is one of the most fascinating questions in
fundamental physics today. Although its existence is convincingly demonstrated by a host of
cosmological and astrophysical studies, there is no known fundamental particle that can account for the
properties of dark matter. Many new physics models, however, include stable, weakly interacting
massive particles (WIMPs), which are promising dark matter candidates. If the dark matter is indeed
composed of WIMPs, then it follows that the Milky Way's dark matter halo could be directly observed by
searching for its extremely rare interactions with the atomic nuclei in a terrestrial detector. We will
search for these interactions using liquid xenon as our target material. Our search will initially take place
within the context of the Large Underground Xenon (LUX) experiment, which is currently being
commissioned at the Sanford Laboratory in Lead, South Dakota. The LUX experiment is expected to be
the most sensitive WIMP search ever performed and will improve upon current experiments by more
than an order of magnitude. We will also develop new experimental techniques to reduce backgrounds
and improve the reliability of liquid xenon technology in anticipation of the ambitious dark matter
experiments which will supersede LUX in the next three to five years.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
26
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Molecular and Material Approaches to Overcome Kinetic and Energetic Constraints in Dye‐Sensitized
Solar Cells
Dr. Thomas Hamann, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
The aim of this project is to use a fundamental understanding of the kinetic processes within a
dye‐sensitized solar cell to move the design of this cell into newer and better regimes for assembly and
performance. The efficiencies of present forms of this cell reached a plateau twenty years ago. This
research intends to remove the limitations that have impeded progress since that time. In this project,
concerted changes will be made in the active chemical elements of the cell through the study and
control of the electron transfer kinetics of the reactant dyes and regenerating agents and through a
reconstruction of the mesoscopic architecture of the substrate metal oxide electrode. Through a
fundamental understanding of both homogeneous and heterogeneous electron transfer theory, new
chromophores, solvents, and current carrying regenerating molecules will be selected and studied to
define the limiting kinetic steps and processes within this complex system. As a perturbation upon
these kinetics, novel designs for the nanometer‐sized architectures of the metal oxide anode will be
developed and synthesized, and their efficacy as a component in a dye sensitized system will be
established and analyzed.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
27
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Crystallization‐driven assembly of conjugated‐polymer‐based nanostructures
Dr. Ryan Hayward, Assistant Professor
Department of Polymer Science and Engineering
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
The goal of this project is to use crystallization of electronically conducting (conjugated)
polymers to fabricate well‐defined crystalline building blocks of nanometer‐scale dimensions. These
materials will then be assembled into photovoltaic devices with optimized structures, and therefore
improved efficiencies, in a cost‐effective manner. It is well known that conjugated polymers often
crystallize into nanowires or fibrils, i.e., one‐dimensionally extended crystals with micrometer‐scale
lengths and nanometer‐scale widths and thicknesses. The project will employ crystallization of a model
conducting polymer, poly(3‐hexyl thiophene), as a driving force for the organization of several types of
materials including inorganic semiconductor nanoparticles, diblock copolymers, and segmented polymer
nanowires. Research will examine how these nanoscale structures organize themselves into
superstructures on larger length scales and how organization of material on each length scale influences
the photophysical properties of the resulting devices. The proposed work will open new routes to
simultaneously controlling the organization and electronic properties of matter on three different length
scales, the molecular scale, the nanoscale, and the colloidal scale. It will also contribute to the critically
important mission of improving efficiencies of low‐cost, polymer‐based photovoltaic devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
28
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Plant‐Microbe Genomic Systems Optimization for Energy
Dr. Samuel Hazen, Assistant Professor
Biology Department
University of Massachussetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
To evolve from promise to practice, essential optimization of each step of an advanced biofuel
industry based on cellulosic biomass is already underway. For the present research, the bioassay will be
used to measure rates of ethanol production in various accessions of the energy crop model Bd and then
assess genetic diversity for this trait in this species. In doing so, the research will seek to resolve the
mechanisms underlying plant feedstock quality through genetic analysis with a focus on energy crop
improvement. As a second phase, to determine the plausibility of specific positive interactions between
plant and microbial genotypes, pairwise comparisons will be made, varying both plant and microbial
genotypes. Similar to adapting crop varieties to different environments, these experiments will link the
need for specific feedstock properties to biomass conversion processes. Importantly, the development
and optimization of unified plant‐microbe genomic systems will advance the concept of “plant‐microbe
co‐development” within the industry, thus improving the efficiency of cellulosic biofuels production
from ecologically and economically sustainable resources without affecting food supply.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
29
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Cosmological Probes of Fundamental Physics
Dr. Chris Hirata, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
This project will investigate the theoretical aspects of cosmological probes of dark energy, dark
matter, and inflation. The specific objectives are (1) to investigate nonlinear structure formation effects
at high redshift, including the suppression of power due to the relative velocity of baryons and dark
matter that has recently been identified; to explore its consequences for tests of dark matter and
inflation (via the small scale power spectrum) and dark energy (via the effect on baryon‐acoustic
oscillations); and to search for other such nonlinear processes; (2) to explore the use of higher‐order
correlation functions of the cosmic microwave background polarization and galaxy surveys to measure
primordial gravitational waves and constrain inflationary physics; and to critically examine the
systematic uncertainties that may arise; and (3) to continue the search for new physical effects in the
standard Lambda cold dark matter (CDM) cosmology that could contaminate the currently used
cosmological probes, or be useful to reduce statistical or systematic errors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
30
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Nanoscale Mercury Sulfide‐Organic Matter Interactions and Implications for Solubility and
Biomethylation
Dr. Heileen Hsu‐Kim, Assistant Professor
Civil and Environmental Engineering Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
Effective solutions for remediation of mercury contamination remain elusive because of our
poor understanding of biogeochemical processes that control mobilization of mercury and
biomethylation in sediments. This research seeks to characterize the geochemical forms of mercury that
persist in polluted sediments and link this knowledge to their bioavailability toward microbes. The fate
of mercury in these settings involves a complex series of transformations including HgS mineral
dissolution, colloid formation and transport, oxidation/reduction, and methylation by anaerobic
sediment bacteria. In all of these steps, natural organic matter (NOM) plays a critical role for reaction
rates. This research aims to elucidate the nanoscale interactions between mercury, sulfide, and NOM
that are critical drivers of mercury geochemistry. This information will ultimately be used to establish a
new geochemical framework for predicting mercury methylation potential in contaminated sediments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
31
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Quantum Transport in Topological Insulator Nanoelectronic Devices
Dr. Pablo Jarillo‐Herrero, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The goal of this research project is to investigate novel quantum electronic transport
phenomena in a recently discovered class of materials known as topological insulators. Topological
insulators (TIs) are materials with a bulk band gap but which have a conducting surface state. The
unique geometry, band structure and topological characteristics of the TI surface states have generated
extraordinary interest in the physics community and have led, together with graphene, to the
emergence of a new paradigm of “relativistic” condensed matter physics. Ultimately, these studies in TIs
may lead to new types of quantum devices based on the electron spin (rather than its charge) and, more
fundamentally, to new information processing based on topological quantum computation.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
32
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Systems Level Investigation of Uranium Resistance and Regulation by Caulobacter Crescentus
Dr. Yongqin Jiao, Staff Scientist
Biosciences and Biotechnology Division
Physical and Life Scientist Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
Microbes are known to play a major role in influencing the movement of uranium and other
environmental contaminants. In addition to simply surviving exposure to radionuclides, some microbes
are capable of using these compounds to promote their growth, altering their chemical state to restrict
their movement in the environment. However, understanding of the basic mechanisms that microbes
use to perform these metabolic reactions is limited, especially in environments exposed to oxygen. In
this research project, the biological systems of the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus that allow it to
detect uranium in the environment, accumulate the metal at the cell's surface, and use it to generate
energy via respiratory metabolism (essentially "breathing" uranium) will be examined. The long term
goal of the project is to develop a conceptual model of uranium cycling that could be used to
understand processes occurring at contaminated sites and inform potential bioremediation strategies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
33
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Efficient Graph Kernels for Extreme Scale Analysis of Environmental Community Data
Dr. Anantharaman Kalyanaraman, Assistant Professor
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99164
The goal of this research is to develop novel parallel algorithms for graph‐theoretic analysis of
biological data on next‐generation supercomputing platforms. Graph methods have an immense
potential to transform the information space in bioinformatics and computational biology. The growing
sizes of data repositories have ensured that such potential cannot be realized without a comprehensive
embrace of high performance computing. The methods developed in this project will allow scientists to
discover community structures hidden within very large graphs built out of high‐throughput biological
data. The specific aims of the project are to (1) develop scalable graph‐theoretic parallel algorithms for
clustering biological data; (2) build new inter‐database analytical capabilities using novel multi‐graph
representations of biological data; and (3) apply graph‐theoretic algorithms on the clustering
components of three large‐scale applications in metaproteomics and phylogenetics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
34
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
The Neutrino: A Better Understanding Through Astrophysics
Dr. James Kneller, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
Over the past decade the evidence for neutrino flavor mixing has passed from tentative to
compelling. This remarkable phenomenon has widely recognized implications for astrophysics because
neutrinos are so very important in the hot and dense environments, such as core‐collapse supernovae,
that one only finds in the cosmos. The hints of successful explosions seen in the latest supernova
simulations mean we need to confront them with the observations that neutrinos can provide but,
unfortunately, our current understanding of the neutrino is incomplete and the signal from the next
Galactic supernova is uncertain. But by studying the behavior of neutrinos in core‐collapse supernovae
and in similar hot/dense environments, determining the sensitivity of supernova neutrino flavor
transformation to the unknown neutrino mixing parameters, and learning how these properties affect
Galactic supernova neutrino burst signals, we are presented with a situation where the missing neutrino
properties will be imprinted into the signal itself. The goal of this project is accordingly to prepare for
the detection of neutrinos from the next Galactic supernova, and to anticipate how these future
observations can be used to improve our understanding of neutrinos.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
35
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Direct Production of 99MTC Using a Small Medical Cyclotron
Dr. Suzanne Lapi, Assistant Professor of Radiology
School of Medicine
Washington University
Saint Louis, MO 63110
Over 80% of nuclear medicine procedures require the use of the radioisotope 99mTc.
Compounds that make use of this isotope are used in many studies, from cancer diagnosis to
assessment of heart function. Recently, there have been many reports of the “isotope crisis” related to
a shortage of 99mTc. Currently, 99mTc is produced via nuclear fission using highly enriched uranium
(HEU), which is a concern because of nuclear proliferation risks. In addition to this, the United States is
dependent solely on currently unreliable foreign sources of this important medical isotope. Clearly, a
need exists to probe alternative domestic production routes of 99mTc. This application describes an
investigation toward the non‐HEU production of 99mTc with a small medical cyclotron, of which there
are many located through the United States. The overarching goal of this project is for Washington
University to develop the in house capability to routinely produce 99mTc for nuclear medicine patient
procedures and to translate this capability to other nuclear medicine departments. Our facility is
uniquely situated to explore the scope of this project as we have the expertise in cyclotron targetry and
a very close relationship with the medical community because of our location within the department of
radiology at one of the best medical schools in the country. Overall, the project introduces a
straightforward domestic solution to the current crisis while also addressing the proliferation issues
associated with the current method of production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
36
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Transport Studies of Quantum Magnetism: Physics and Methods
Dr. Minhyea Lee, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
The goal of this project is to uncover and identify new states of matter resulting from the strong
correlation in various quantum spin systems. The work will be focused on understanding the properties
of the new ground states by studying elementary excitations via thermal and electrical transport
properties. It will also involve the development of a new experimental method for thermometry that is
tailored for thermal transport measurement and is also expected to have a more general impact on
ultra‐low‐temperature thermometry.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
37
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Combating the Data Movement Bottleneck
Dr. Peter Lindstrom, Computer Scientist
Data Analysis Group
Center for Applied Scientific Computing
Computation Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
On next‐generation supercomputers, the power cost of moving data is the critical metric for
software while limited bandwidth further constrains the amount of data that can be moved. The
objective of this project is to alleviate the data‐movement bottleneck in extreme‐scale computing to
accelerate numerical simulation and data analysis. The research will focus on software solutions to
reduce the amount of data transferred between memory banks, across distributed compute nodes, and
between main memory and secondary storage. This project will take a three‐pronged approach based
on maximizing data locality by optimally reordering data elements, improving compute locality using
parallel stream processing, and integrating high‐speed data compression. These complementary
techniques will limit the total size of data moved, minimize data accesses, and make effective use of
multilevel caches to keep data as close to the processor as possible. This effort will lead to new tools for
greatly reducing data movement with commensurate increases in performance and reductions in power
consumption on next‐generation massively multi‐core computer architectures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
38
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Bio‐Inspired Electro‐Photonic Structure for Dye‐Sensitized Solar Cells
Dr. Rene Lopez, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
The objective of this research project is to redesign and enhance the optical and electronic
properties of dye‐sensitized solar cells in a comprehensive manner through bio‐inspired optical designs
for light absorption and concomitant multi‐scale reconstructions of the metal‐oxide electrode structure
for electron transport. The project will seek to utilize a “butterfly‐wing” photonic crystal design for the
anode of the solar cell to provide simultaneously a needed optical enhancement in the red wavelengths
of the spectrum and a shortened, more efficient electron transport pathway for charge collection. The
investigator will coordinate an array of experiments (1) to explore the synthesis of novel photonic
structures for the solids based on examples taken from nature and (2) to determine their electronic
properties. These results will be integrated into a comprehensive three‐dimensional mathematical
model and will allow the optimum parameters to be defined for the design of a high‐efficiency, dye‐
sensitized solar cell.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
39
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Multi‐System Analysis of Microbial Biofilms
Dr. Matthew Marshall, Senior Research Scientist
Environmental Microbiology Group
Biological Sciences Division
Fundamental Computational and Science Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
Microbial biofilms impact many biogeochemical processes including the fate and transport of
contaminants in the subsurface. The present research will employ state‐of‐the‐art technologies to
determine the chemical composition of biofilms in relation to their highly hydrated native‐state
structure/architecture. The research will extend the mechanistic understanding of extracellular
polymeric substance (EPS)‐metal ion interactions using high‐resolution cryogenic imaging and analysis
techniques at the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL) and will develop new
spectroscopy methods for obtaining spatially resolved chemical information. Synchrotron X‐ray‐based
analyses will be used to obtain high‐sensitivity, element‐specific chemical distributions within biofilms
that have been imaged using EMSL microscopies and spectroscopies. These integrated technologies will
characterize the chemical and physical interactions of hydrated biofilms and catalytic components of
EPS as they interact with redox‐transformable metal ions and influence biogeochemical reactions.
Determining the chemical composition and spatial coordination of biofilm‐associated EPS will
significantly advance understanding of how molecular‐scale biogeochemical reactions can influence
subsurface contaminant fate and transport at larger scales.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
40
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Fundamental Electroweak Interaction Studies Using Trapped Atoms and Ions
Dr. Daniel Melconian, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
Ion and atom traps at radioactive ion beam facilities have opened up a new vista in precision
low‐ energy nuclear physics experiments. They provide ideal sources for studying the decays of rare
isotopes: The trapped samples are extremely cold (< 1 mK) and localized (< 1 mm2), and the trap forces
are weak enough that the daughter particles escape with negligible distortions to their momenta. This
project will construct a large‐diameter, open Penning trap and couple it to T‐REX (Texas A&M University
Reaccelerated Exotics), which is the upgraded radioactive ion beam facility at the Cyclotron Institute at
Texas A&M University. The flagship experimental program will test our understanding of the
fundamental symmetries underlying our current theory of electroweak interactions by measuring the b
− n correlation parameters and ft values from isospin T = 2 superallowed ˉ‐delayed proton decays.
Comparison of these precision measurements to theoretical predictions will either confirm the Standard
Model to a higher degree or point to new physics and help guide theorists toward developing the New
Standard Model. In addition, the versatility of this system will also make it a general purpose decay
station where any number of other low‐energy experiments will be possible (mass measurements, laser
spectroscopy, electron‐capture studies, etc.).
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
41
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Weak Interaction Study Using Laser Trapped 6He Atoms
Dr. Peter Mueller, Assistant Physicst
Low Energy Nuclear Physics Group
Physics Division
Physical Sciences and Engineering
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
High‐precision measurements of how radioactive nuclei decay have played an essential role in
today’s understanding of the fundamental laws of nature, which are summed up in what is known as the
Standard Model of particle physics. However, modern cosmological observations, such as the presence
of Dark Matter and the lack of antimatter in the universe cannot be explained by the Standard Model.
Thus, the quest for direct experimental evidence of “New Physics” is an exciting endeavor currently
being pursued on many fronts in fundamental research. Here, the decay of 6He, a radioactive isotope of
helium, will be studied in exquisite detail to test the “Weak Interaction” component of the Standard
Model. Atoms of 6He suspended in vacuum by laser light represent an ideal laboratory in which to
detect the decay products and measure their properties with high precision. Combined with the detailed
theoretical understanding of this rather simple nucleus, telltale signs of new interactions would reveal
themselves as small deviations from the Standard Model predictions. Techniques developed for this
experiment will also enable studies of other noble gas isotopes in a quest for additional hints of “New
Physics.”
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
42
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Quantum Field Theories for Cosmology
Dr. Alberto Nicolis, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
This research spans a wide range of subjects in theoretical cosmology and in field theory. In the
first part, effective field theory techniques will be applied to the study of fluids and of cosmological
perturbations. Such an approach—now standard in particle physics—is quite unconventional for
theoretical cosmology. The research addresses several concrete questions where this formalism will
prove valuable, both within and outside the cosmological context, concerning, for instance, the
quantum mechanical properties of fluids and of superfluids, the post‐inflationary reheating phase of
early cosmology, and the effects of large matter inhomogeneities at short scales on the dynamics of
cosmological perturbations and of the universe as a whole at much larger scales. In the second part,
more fundamental questions and ideas will be investigated for the present universe as well as for the
very early one, using quantum field theory as a guide. The questions to be addressed include the
following: Is the present cosmic acceleration caused by a new, ‘dark’ form of energy or are we instead
observing a breakdown of Einstein’s general relativity at cosmological distances? Is the cosmic
acceleration accelerating? Is the Big Bang unavoidable? Related to this, is early inflation the only
sensible cure for the shortcomings of the standard Big Bang model and the only possible source for the
observed scale‐invariant cosmological perturbations?
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
43
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
High‐Average Power Laser Experiments at the Large Plasma Device
Dr. Christoph Niemann, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
The goal of this project is to obtain highly detailed measurements of laser‐driven collisionless
shocks and highly nonlinear plasma waves in a large magnetized plasma (i.e., the Large Plasma Device at
the University of California, Los Angeles ) using a new, high‐average‐power slab‐laser system (25 J at
4 Hz). Magnetized collisionless shocks are launched by rapidly exploding laser plasmas and a
large (≤50 cm) diamagnetic laser‐plasma cavity, which acts as a fast moving magnetic piston upon the
highly magnetized ambient plasma (17 m x 0.7 m at 1012‐1013 cm‐3). In comparison with earlier work on
pinches, these experiments can be performed with arbitrary shock propagation angles (from quasi‐
perpendicular to quasi‐parallel) and can thus access weakly supercritical shocks in both the dispersive
and dissipative regime. The 1 Hz repetition rate of these experiments allows us to create shocks
reproducibly for tens of thousands of times, leading to highly detailed measurements of (1) the
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) response of the ambient plasma, (2) the dissipation of the shock, and (3)
the effect on the particle velocity distribution. Particle acceleration in the shocks will also be studied
using preformed non‐thermal particles.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
44
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Measuring the Importance of Valence to Chemistry of Nanocrystal Surfaces
Dr. Jonathan Owen, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
Surface structure is central to the properties of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals. Yet the
valence of atoms on nanocrystal surfaces and its influence on the binding and exchange of their ligands
remain an essentially unexplored avenue of research. Current descriptions of semiconductor nanocrystal
surfaces do not adequately distinguish between dative ligand interactions (L‐type binding) and ligands
that balance their charge with nonstoichiometric crystals (X‐type binding). To address this problem, this
project will investigate the relationship between nanocrystal stoichiometry and the exchange of both X‐
and L‐type surface ligands. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will be used to measure the
thermodynamic binding constants and the mechanisms and kinetics of ligand exchange. The project will
develop methods (1) to exchange surfactant ligands allowing the fabrication of thin films composed of
nonstoichiometric nanocrystals with an intact metal‐ligand surface layer and (2) to controllably deposit
films of nanocrystals using layer‐by‐layer dip coating and electrodeposition where the X‐type organic
surfactant ligands have been replaced with a halide ligand shell. These techniques will furnish
nanocrystal thin films with a small inter‐nanocrystal separation and enhanced electronic coupling.
Fabrication of field effect transistor devices using these methods will allow the details of atomic surface
structure to be correlated with electrical transport characteristics. To date, nanocrystal researchers have
heavily relied on an L‐type ligand model when describing nanocrystal surfaces. Clarifying the
importance of X‐type ligands to nanocrystal surface chemistry and its relationship to stoichiometry can
have a dramatic influence on nanocrystal research and will lead to powerful methods for precisely
tailoring nanocrystal surfaces. In particular, these methods may offer major improvements in
nanocrystal‐based thin film optoelectronic devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
45
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Developing Novel Techniques for Readout, Calibration and Event Selection in the NOVA Long‐Baseline
Neutrino Experiment
Dr. Ryan Patterson, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
The long‐baseline neutrino experiment known as NOνA (NuMI or Neutrinos at the Main Injector
Off‐Axis νe Appearance Experiment ) uses a fine‐grained, low‐Z, fully active detector that offers
unprecedented electron neutrino identification capabilities for a detector of its scale. This research
involves the development and implementation of novel techniques for channel readout, detector
calibration, and event reconstruction that make full use of the strengths of the NOνA detector
technology. In particular, custom event reconstruction algorithms that use the rich information
available in the substructure of hadronic and electromagnetic showers will be designed. Exploiting this
information provides not only substantial improvement in background rejection for the electron
neutrino search but also better shower energy resolution (improving the precision on measured
oscillation parameters) and a high‐energy electromagnetic calibration source (through neutral pion
events). Further, a new electronics readout scheme compatible with the existing hardware that can
reduce near detector event pile‐up and offer powerful timing information to the reconstruction wil be
developed and deployed, allowing for cosmic ray muon tagging via track direction determination, among
other things. In conjunction with the above, the project involves leading the calibration of the NOvA
detectors, including characterizing individual electronics channels, correcting for spatial variations across
the detector, and establishing absolute event energy scales.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
46
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Atomic Layer Deposition of Superconductors, an Innovative Approach to Improve the Performance of
High Energy Physic Accelerators
Dr. Thomas Prolier, Assistant Physicist
Surface Chemistry Group
Material Sciences and High Energy Physics Divisions
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
After 40 years of research and development, niobium superconducting radio frequency (SRF)
cavity performance may be reaching fundamental intrinsic materials limits. Presently, the state of the
art for Nb cavities involves using reproducible operating field gradients of 35 MV/m, for which the peak
equatorial RF field of 140 mT has almost reached the depairing limit set by the thermodynamic critical
field of about 200 mT. Based on theoretical models by Alex Gurevich of Florida State University, the
research seeks to build cavities with cost effective deposition methods that will reduce significantly the
operating and capital accelerator cost. The goals require a close‐coupled effort that (1) develops an
atomic layer deposition (ALD) synthesis process of high temperature superconductors on coupons or
dummy cavities, (2) provides complementary production deposition techniques that can produce high‐
quality, thick (~µm) Nb films on coupons and cavities, (3) allows for the rapid surface science
characterization required to optimize synthetic/deposition methods on coupons, (4) provides the best
cavity base material to use, (5) develops methods to scale PEALD (plasma‐enhanced atomic layer
deposition) to real cavities, (6) provides for fast turn‐around vertical cavity tests, and (7) allows for reuse
of the base cavities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
47
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Real‐Time Studies of Nucleation, Growth and Development of Ferromagnetism in Individual Protein‐
Templated Magnetic Nanocrystal
Dr. Tatiana Prozorov, Assistant Scientist III
Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering
Ames Laboratory
Ames, IA 50011
The aim of this project is to determine the nature of protein‐templated nanoparticle formation.
Using advanced electron microscopy techniques, the research intends to uncover the mechanism of
particle nucleation and growth, the emergence of crystal structure, and the development of
ferromagnetism in individual bio‐templated magnetic nanocrystals. Magnetic nanoparticles with narrow
size distribution, large magnetic moment, and controlled magnetic anisotropy have important
technological applications. Bio‐inspired synthetic routes offer room‐temperature pathways to a variety
of magnetic nanostructures having shapes and sizes not realizable via conventional inorganic chemical
techniques. However, despite significant research effort in this area, fundamental understanding is
lacking on how the supramolecular assembly of biomolecules dictates nanoparticle formation and
functional properties. The work will make possible in‐situ nanoparticle synthesis and dynamic studies of
the emergence of crystallinity and evolution of magnetic response in individual protein‐templated
magnetite nanoparticles free of artifacts associated with the conventional sample preparation and
characterization.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
48
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Solving the Long‐Standing Problem of Low‐Energy Nuclear Reactions at the Highest Microscopic Level
Dr. Sofia Quaglioni, Science and Engineering Member of Technical Staff 3
Computational Nuclear Physics Group
Physics Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94551
This project aims to develop a comprehensive framework that will lead to a fundamental
description of both structural properties and reactions of light nuclei in terms of constituent protons and
neutrons interacting through nucleon‐nucleon and three‐nucleon forces. This is a long‐sought goal of
nuclear theory that is now within reach as new promising techniques and the required computational
power to implement them are becoming available. This project will provide the research community
with the theoretical and computational tools that will enable (1) an accurate prediction for the fusion
reactions that power stars and Earth‐based fusion facilities; (2) an improved description of the
spectroscopy of exotic nuclei, including light borromean systems; and (3) a fundamental understanding
of the three‐nucleon force in nuclear reactions and nuclei at the drip line.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
49
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Physics of Lattice Defects and Defect‐Impurity Complexes in Materials Used for Superconducting RF
Cavities
Dr. Alexander Romanenko, Associate Scientist and Peoples Fellow
Superconducting Materials
Technical Division
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL 60510
The proposed research seeks to understand the role of lattice defects such as dislocations,
vacancies, and vacancy‐hydrogen complexes in the performance of superconducting radio frequency
(RF) cavities. Based on the results of the preliminary studies, the work aims to fill the gap in knowledge
and allow further progress in gradients and quality factors. It is intended to perform systematic studies
on samples by utilizing state‐of‐the‐art surface analytical techniques such as electron backscattered
diffraction (EBSD), focused ion beam (FIB), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), positron
annihilation spectroscopy, and elastic recoil detection (ERD). The effect of lattice defects on RF
superconductivity will be directly studied by introducing localized irradiation damage into niobium
cavities and characterizing the RF performance with advanced thermometry. The expected outcome is
the capability to tailor a superconducting RF cavity surface to sustain the highest surface magnetic fields
based on a detailed understanding of near‐surface lattice defect structure and its effect on RF
performance.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics (NP).
50
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Engineering self‐assembled bioreactors from protein microcompartments
Dr. David Savage, Assistant Professor
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
The goals of this research are to understand how organisms such as bacteria segregate certain
metabolic processes inside of specific structures, or “microcompartments,” in the cell and apply this
knowledge to develop novel engineered microcompartments for potential use in nanotechnology and
metabolic engineering. For example, in some bacteria, self‐assembling protein microcompartments
called carboxysomes encapsulate the enzymes involved in carbon fixation, enabling the cell to utilize
carbon dioxide more effectively than if the enzymes were free in the cell. This research will determine
how structures such as carboxysomes assemble and function in bacteria and develop a means for
creating novel, synthetic microcompartments for optimizing production of specific energy‐rich
compounds.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
51
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
A Physicochemical Method for Separating Rare Earths: Addressing an Impending Shortfall
Dr. Eric Schelter, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
The objective of this project is to develop new approaches to chemically extract cerium (Ce),
praseodymium (Pr), neodymium (Nd) and terbium (Tb) ions from mixtures of rare earth ions. Nitroxyl
radicals will be synthesized and evaluated for selective binding of high value rare earths through
oxidative intermediate valence effects. This research will develop new fundamental knowledge in f‐
element chemistry and the potential for new element‐specific extractants. The extractants are expected
to reduce the costs of strategically important materials made from the elements Ce, Pr, Nd and Tb.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
52
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Data Locality Enhancement of Dynamic Simulations for Exascale Computing
Dr. Xipeng Shen, Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Science
College of William and Mary
Williamsburg, VA 23187
Computer simulation is important for scientific research in many disciplines. Many such
programs are complex, and transfer a large amount of data in a dynamically changing pattern. Memory
performance is key to maximizing computing efficiency in the era of Chip Multiprocessors (CMP) due to
the growing disparity between the slowly expanded memory bandwidth and the rapidly increased
demands for data by processors. The importance is underlined by the trend toward exascale computing,
in which the processors are expected to each contain hundreds or thousands of (heterogeneous) cores.
Unfortunately, today’s computer systems lack support for a high degree of memory transfer. This
project proposes to improve memory performance of dynamic applications by developing two new
techniques that are tailored especially for the emerging features of CMP. The first technique is
asynchronous streamlining, which analyzes the memory reference patterns of an application during
runtime and regulates both control flows and memory references on the fly. The second technique is
neighborhood‐aware locality optimization, which concentrates on the non‐uniform relations among
computing elements. This research will produce a robust tool for scientific users to enhance program
locality on multi‐ and many‐core systems that is not possible to achieve with existing tools. Further, it
will contribute to the advancement of computational sciences and promote academic research and
education in the challenging field of scientific computing.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
53
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Fundamental Instability Measurements in Magnetically Driven Z‐Pinch Liner Implosions
Dr. Daniel Sinars, High Energy Density Experiments Team Manager
High Energy Density Science Group
Pulsed Power Sciences Center
Science and Technology and Research Foundations Division
Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, NM 87185
The magnetic pressure generated by large, pulsed currents can be used to directly compress
initially solid metal tubes (liners) to extreme conditions. The Sandia Z facility can generate 100 megabars
of magnetic pressure (25 MA at a radius of 1 mm), similar to the radiation‐driven ablation pressure on
fusion capsules designed for the National Ignition Facility. Achieving extreme conditions in the
laboratory for fusion or dynamic materials studies requires the compression of matter and current to
small radii. The most important factor limiting the controlled compression of dense matter to small radii
using magnetic pressure is the magneto‐Rayleigh‐Taylor (MRT) instability. In liner implosions the MRT
instability arises at the outer plasma‐vacuum interface, where the driving magnetic pressure plays a role
analogous to a light fluid pushing on a heavy fluid (the plasma liner) as in the classical fluid Rayleigh‐
Taylor instability. The MRT instabilities in fast z‐pinch systems are complex, and we rely heavily on
advanced simulation tools to model them. Surprisingly, there are few data that can be used to validate
these simulation tools, particularly in the ~100 ns regime where plasma effects and strong shocks can be
important. The principal investigator recently led the first well‐characterized MRT growth
measurements on ~100 ns time scales using initially solid Al liners. This research will enable several
additional experimental campaigns on the Sandia Z facility to study both fundamental and applied
aspects of the MRT instability. Data collected in these experiments are expected to ultimately improve
our physics understanding and help us validate critical simulation tools, thereby benefiting fusion and
dynamic materials applications based on magnetic pressure drive.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
54
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Cosmology with the Lyman‐Alpha Forest
Dr. Anze Slosar, Assistant Scientist
Cosmology and Astrophysics Group
Physics Department
High Energy and Nuclear Physics Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
This project will investigate the nature of dark energy, the mysterious component of the
universe responsible for its accelerated expansion, using quasars, which are the brightest objects in the
universe. Using data from the Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS) experiment, the three‐
dimensional structures in the early universe will be determined by measuring the shadows that
intervening neutral hydrogen in space casts on the spectra of quasars, known as the Lyman‐alpha forest.
Such data offer a unique probe of the distant universe and will also provide constraints on dark matter,
neutrinos and cosmic inflation. A comprehensive framework will be built based on novel and robust
techniques to analyze the Lyman‐alpha forest spectra, with strong emphasis on understanding the
systematic errors arising from astrophysical and instrumental effects. This will result in new constraints
on cosmological parameters and pave the way for the future experiments studying the nature of dark
energy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
55
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
New Dimension Reduction Methods for Multi‐scale Nonlinear Phenomena
Dr. Alexandre Tartakovsky, Senior Research Scientist
Computational Mathematics Group
Computational Sciences and Mathematics Division
Fundamental and Computational Sciences Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
This project will develop a new dimension‐reduction method for complex, multiscale, non‐linear
problems and design scalable, communication‐minimizing algorithms for the implementation of this
method on leadership‐class computers. Many mathematical models of natural and/or engineered
systems are multiscale and nonlinear and have a common feature: Their discrete approximations are
systems of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), which can contain an enormous number of
unknowns. Direct simulation of these models can be extremely expensive. The dimension reduction
methods will provide a rigorous mathematical foundation for approximating large systems of ODEs with
models containing a much smaller number of unknowns. By doing this, the new method will address
computational challenges posed by large‐size ODE models. These outcomes would constitute a
breakthrough in multiscale modeling with a strong potential for significant advances in various
engineering and science applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR).
56
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Defining Fe and H Speciation During Olivine Carbonation Under Highly Reducing Conditions
Dr. Alexis Templeton, Assistant Professor
Department of Geological Sciences
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
Rock weathering significantly affects atmospheric and groundwater chemistry, particularly the
exchange of carbon dioxide between air, water and rock components. However, it is difficult to unravel
chemical reactions between fluids and rocks in the subsurface, including microbially mediated
biogeochemical processes. The goal of this project is to examine the connection(s) among the
geochemical behavior of iron and the extent of hydrogen, methane or carbonate mineral formation
during the aqueous alteration of olivine at near‐surface temperatures and pressures. An integrated
suite of surface sensitive x‐ray scattering and spectroscopic techniques will be used to interrogate the
dynamic structure and reactivity of the mineral‐water and mineral‐microbe interfaces. Stable isotope
measurements of hydrogen, water, and methane will also reveal whether similar microbial dynamics
might be successfully detected and interpreted in in‐situ systems. These investigations will provide first‐
order insights into geochemical and microbial processes in the shallow earth during the exchange of
atmospheric carbon dioxide with the geosphere.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
57
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Interpreting New Data from the High Energy Frontier
Dr. Jesse Thaler, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
This research aims to maximize the discovery potential of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) by
using theoretical insights in high energy physics to galvanize the search for new physics. The LHC will
push the frontiers of fundamental physics through high energy particle collisions. However, gleaning
evidence for new physics from the overwhelming standard model background is a challenging task, and
innovative methods in data analysis and interpretation are needed to convert raw experimental
measurements into evidence for new physics. In this research, three aspects of LHC physics in which
theoretical insights can play a crucial role will be addressed. First, to propose new LHC searches, novel
LHC signals for new physics scenarios involving supersymmetry and dark matter will be identified.
Second, to increase experimental sensitivities in existing LHC searches, the PI will propose new data
analysis techniques to better measure and identify jets produced in high energy collisions. Third, to
make signal extraction more robust, the PI will improve Standard Model background predictions.
Through this research on new physics searches at the high energy frontier, this project will help achieve
the ultimate goal of the LHC: to discover what new phenomena lie beyond the standard model.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
58
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Microbial Communities in Biological Carbon Sequestration
Dr. Susannah Tringe, Career Scientist
Microbial Systems Group
Genomics Division/Joint Genome Institute
Biosciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Wetland ecosystems are known to cycle and potentially store massive amounts of carbon on an
annual basis. Carbon dioxide captured from the atmosphere by plants moves below the water or soil
surface through the action of roots or the death of biomass, where it is subject to the processing by
complex communities of microorganisms. This can result in the degradation of organic carbon back to
carbon dioxide or methane or to more stable forms that may be stored for long periods of time.
Relatively little is known about the organisms performing these processes or what conditions influence
the storage or release of carbon. The current research will use cutting‐edge genomic techniques to
examine microbial community structure and functional properties in a restored wetland habitat in San
Francisco bay, with an emphasis on characterizing processes that result in increased biosequestration of
organic carbon over time. The study will leverage resources at the Department of Energy Joint Genome
Institute to link activities of dominant environmental microbes to major carbon cycle processes to
enhance our understanding of critical biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem sustainability.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER).
59
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Innovative Techniques for Improved Diagnosis and Control of Edge Localized Modes in 3‐D Toroidal
Plasmas
Dr. Ezekial Unterberg, Research and Development Associate
Experimental Plasma Physics Group
Fusion Energy Division
Nuclear Science and Engineering Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The next step toward a magnetic fusion reactor is the large international experiment currently
being built in France called ITER. A major challenge for ITER and future fusion reactors is controlling the
intense flux of heat deposited on the confinement chamber wall by high‐energy, long‐pulse plasmas.
Furthermore, local concentrations of heat flux can seriously damage the wall surface. Thus, interactions
of the plasma with the material wall must be monitored and controlled in three dimensions (3‐D). Of
special concern are sudden large impulses of heat resulting from plasma instabilities such as the Edge
Localized Mode (ELM). These impulses create peaked values of heat flux that are many times the
steady‐state wall flux levels and thus can augment the erosion of wall surface. This research aims to
build tools to improve the understanding of ELM excitation, mitigation, and suppression mechanisms
toward the design of more effective control methods. The design principles and mathematical tools
developed and validated in this work can, in principle, help diagnose a wide range of 3‐D edge physics
phenomena closely related to those examined here. The implementation of two diagnostics for
measurement of these 3‐D edge perturbations will be pursued: The first diagnostic aims to measure the
plasma edge magnetic field structure during the mitigation and/or suppression of ELMs by applying
external 3‐D fields know as resonant magnetic perturbations. The other diagnostic will be used for
precise tracking of high‐speed, cryogenic pellets used for triggering ELMs. Both of these diagnostics rely
on the processing of 2‐D data to determine 3‐D plasma characteristics. Therefore, a unifying analysis
method to extract this 3‐D information will be developed using common mathematical techniques. The
new information given by this analysis can aid in the fundamental understanding of ELMs by providing
novel, high‐fidelity 3‐D information during ELM control experiments in present‐day experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
60
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Miracles in Scattering Amplitudes: from QCD to Gravity
Dr. Anastasia Volovich, Richard and Edna Salomon Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
The present research in the area of theoretical high energy physics will be centered around both
theory and phenomenology of scattering amplitudes in quantum field theories and gravity. Recently,
remarkable advances have been made in this area, with a broad spectrum of results ranging from new
precision predictions in Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) that will be very important for understanding
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) data to the miraculous structures in N=4 Yang‐Mills and N=8 supergravity.
This research involves deepening our understanding of gauge and gravity theories by exploring hidden
structures of scattering amplitudes (ranging from integrability to twistors to the theory of motives) and
using these rich structures as much as possible to aid practical calculations relevant to collider physics.
These hidden structures not only help researchers calculate and make predictions for experimentally
relevant processes but also lead to deeper understanding of fundamental properties of field and gravity
theories. The research will contain three major areas, (1) QCD and Collider Physics; (2) N=4 Yang‐Mills
and AdS/CFT (Anti DeSitter Space/Conformal Field Theory); and (3) Quantum Gravity. The funds will be
used to train graduate students and postdocs.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP) and the DOE
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (DOE EPSCoR).
61
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Physics and Control of Locked Modes in the DIII‐D Tokamak
Dr. Francesco Volpe, Assistant Professor
Department of Engineering Physics
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
The objectives of this project are (1) to control instabilities in tokamak plasmas by means of
externally applied magnetic field perturbations and microwave‐generated electric currents and (2) to
improve our understanding of the instability dynamics both by analyzing the unstable magnetic
fluctuations that they generate and by comparing the experimental results with computer model
predictions. Tokamaks are devices that confine toroidal (doughnut‐shaped) fusion plasmas by means of
an equilibrium magnetic field configuration. Coherent helical modifications to the equilibrium magnetic
field called locked modes can form in high‐performance tokamak plasmas, degrading confinement and
resulting, in some cases, in an abrupt termination of the plasma. Such an event, called a disruption, can
be detrimental to the tokamak device. This experimental study will deepen theoretical understanding of
these locked‐mode‐related instabilities, improve the precision and scope of our predictions, and test
and validate specific techniques for avoidance and control. Magnetic field perturbation measurements,
advanced analysis, and comparison between experiment and computer models will be employed to
study the dynamics and growth of locked‐mode‐related instabilities. To be evaluated is the ability to
control locked modes by a combination of (a) externally applied magnetic field perturbations to modify
their location and (b) a microwave‐generated current to modify their size. Of particular utility to the
international ITER tokamak under construction in France is the development of a capability, made
possible by the sensitivity of these locked‐mode‐related instabilities to desired and undesired magnetic
field perturbations and imperfections, to diagnose and correct imperfections (“error fields”) inherently
present upon the construction of a perfectly designed tokamak equilibrium magnetic field.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
62
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
RF Breakdown Dependence on Electric and Magnetic Fields and Pulsed Heating
Dr. Faya Wang, Associate Scientist
Accelerator Design Department
Accelerator Research Division
Accelerator Directorate
SLAC National Acceleratory Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
The objective of this project is to understand breakdown of high gradient phenomena in an
accelerator structure. Electric field, magnetic field and pulsed heating are thought to affect breakdown
based on innumerous experiments. However, it is not clear how the combination of the fields and
heating is governing breakdown since they are coupled in an accelerator cavity. This research aims at
delineating these different effects by designing a special radio‐frequency (RF) cavity that permits the
coupling of two different RF modes and the use of a laser for selected pulsed heating. A good
understanding of these effects is important for designing structures capable of supporting high
accelerating gradients, beyond current state of the art, for devices such as klystrons and magnetrons
used for generating reliable RF power for driving accelerators. Better understanding of the associated
physics and generation of breakdown can lead to significant cost saving for future high gradient
accelerator applications such as linear colliders; compact linear accelerators for light sources, medicine,
and industry; satellite communication systems; and fusion reactors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
63
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Electron Temperature Fluctuation Measurements and Transport Model Validation at Alcator C‐Mod
Dr. Anne White, Assistant Professor
Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The objective of this project is to merge experiment and theory by using advanced turbulence
simulations to aid in the design of a new turbulence diagnostic system that will be used to test the
fundamental physics of turbulent transport in tokamak plasmas. The research project will develop a
novel correlation electron cyclotron emission (CECE) diagnostic system for measuring turbulence in the
core plasma of the Alcator C‐Mod tokamak at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
Gyrokinetic theory describes how small‐scale turbulent fluctuations are responsible for the observed
transport of particles, heat, and momentum in tokamak plasmas. The new and unique data obtained
with the CECE diagnostic system will be used in detailed validation studies to probe the limits of
gyrokinetic theory and to assess the accuracy of models for turbulent‐driven transport in tokamaks. This
diagnostic approach will measure electron temperature fluctuations, which provide direct information
about the underlying physics of heat transport. When combined with advanced models and simulations,
these data can be used to indirectly probe the turbulent transport of particles, momentum, and energy
as well. This research project aims to transform the traditional approach to testing advanced gyrokinetic
turbulence simulations by introducing an innovative method for merging diagnostic development with
code validation. This includes using for the first time quantitative predictions of turbulence
characteristics to guide the design of a new fluctuation diagnostic system.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES).
64
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Quantum Mechanical Simulations of Complex Nanostructures for Photovoltaic Applications
Dr. Zhigang Wu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
This research project involves theoretical studies of complex semiconducting nanomaterials and
their interfaces with other materials for next‐generation photovoltaic cells. The central challenge in
materials simulation is to address complexities in real materials rather than considering the properties
of idealized materials or structures. For photovoltaic devices, it is of paramount importance to be able to
accurately predict excited‐state properties of complex nanostructures that are the result of optical
absorption. However, current quantum mechanical simulation methods are either computationally too
demanding or not sufficiently accurate. The primary objectives of this project are (1) developing a new
theoretical approach for electronic excitation calculations that is both accurate and applicable to large
and complex systems and (2) applying the new methodology to investigate complex nanostructures that
have great potential of opening new routes toward designing a material’s transport, electronic, and
optical properties for photovoltaic and other optoelectronic applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
65
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Functional Domain Walls as Active Elements for Energy Technology
Dr. Junqiao Wu, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
This project aims to understand and exploit novel physics and functionalities of domain walls in
transition metal oxides for their use as active elements to direct matter and energy. Heterophase and
homophase domain walls are mobile, nanoscale elements existing in a wide range of materials; they can
host remarkable, emergent functionalities that are absent in the bulk. This may lead to a variety of new
energy technologies that are superior to existing ones. This research seeks to understand the
fundamental mechanism governing diffusion and recombination of point defects facilitated by domain
walls, demonstrate ultra‐sensitive transduction of external disturbances on domain wall motion, explore
and exploit effects of domain walls in electrothermal transport for nanoscale thermal management, and
finally probe the physical behavior of correlated electrons confined within domain walls as a quasi‐two‐
dimensional electron liquid.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
66
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Enhancement of the Trigger Capaiblity for New Physics at the Large Hadron Collider
Dr. Jinlong Zhang, Assistant Physicist
High Energy Physics Division
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is designed to address some of the most fundamental questions
of physics by producing rare events of new physics in the tremendous background. To increase the
sensitivity to new physics, the availability of more sophisticated event characteristics at early trigger
stages will be crucial to ensure high background rejection with high signal efficiency. The track
information of the event is reconstructed typically with reiterative software on CPUs (central processing
units) and is very time consuming in the LHC environment. The research will involve the designing and
building of a hardware system with massively parallel processing that will reconstruct global tracks with
near‐offline resolution. Subsequently, sophisticated algorithms will combine the precisely reconstructed
tracks with other trigger information to perform early background rejection and signature identification.
This will substantially improve the potential for new physics discoveries.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics (HEP).
67
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Utilizing Molecular Self‐Assembly to Tailor Electrical Properties of Si Nanomembranes
Dr. Pengpeng Zhang, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
The objective of this project is to use silicon (Si) nanomembrane, a well controlled two‐
dimensional single crystalline semiconductor, as a prototype system to explore the mechanistic basis of
electronic interactions at the hetero‐interface and to develop strategies to tailor the nanomembrane's
transport properties by surface functionalization and self‐assembly. Understanding and control of
hetero‐interfaces between organic and inorganic materials is crucially important for the development of
organic electronics, molecular electronics, molecular/biological sensors, and energy converting devices.
However, an atomic‐ and molecular‐ level understanding of charge transfer behaviors at the interface
and how they influence the properties of inorganic materials remains elusive. This work exploits the
precision of molecular assembly on Si nanomembranes and combines the scanning probe microscopy
characterization of local interfacial electronic structures with the electrical transport measurements of
nanomembranes to elucidate the interfacial phenomena. The fundamental insights provided by this
research may lead to the rational design of nanomaterials with controlled properties via regulation of
surfaces and interfaces.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
68
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2011
Real Time TEM Imaging of Materials Transformations in Liquid and Gas Environments
Dr. Haimei Zheng, Staff Scientist
Materials Sciences Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
The objective of this project is to study the physical and chemical processes in materials with
high spatial resolution using in situ liquid or gas environmental transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
Understanding how materials grow and function at the nanometer or atomic scale in their working
environments is essential to developing efficient and inexpensive energy conversion and storage
materials and devices. With real‐time imaging in liquids or gases, this project will develop environmental
cell TEM and result in better understandings of growth and chemical reactions of nanocrystals and mass
transport induced structural changes in electrochemical processes important for energy applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences (BES).
69
