DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Light‐Stimulated Epitaxy of Novel Semiconductor Alloys and Heterostructures
Dr. Kirstin Alberi, Senior Scientist
Experimental Materials Science Group
Chemical and Materials Science Center
Energy Sciences Division
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
Golden, CO 80401
The realization of new semiconductor alloys and heterostructures is critical to materials
research efforts, but kinetic limitations often impede the low temperature growth of such systems.
Innovative approaches designed to tailor specific growth processes are needed to overcome these
longstanding challenges. The principle objective of this research is to use light as an additional free
parameter to control adatom dynamics. Specific goals of the project are to 1) expand our basic
understanding of how photons affect semiconductor growth by molecular beam epitaxy, 2) selectively
stimulate and manipulate surface processes that lead to atomistic growth control, and 3) systematically
advance the boundaries of semiconductor synthesis and investigation. By establishing pathways that
surmount current material synthesis constraints, this work will impact the development of advanced
approaches to access new growth regimes, facilitate the exploration of novel materials systems and
drive breakthroughs in photovoltaics and solid‐state lighting technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
1
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Molecular and Structural Probes of Defect States in Quantum Dot Photovoltaics
Dr. John Asbury, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
The objective of this research on quantum confined nanocrystals is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the chemical properties of ligand‐nanocrystal interfaces that will enable the control of
defect‐driven charge recombination in these systems. With this control, quantum confined nanocrystals
may represent a cost effective means of absorbing light over the full solar spectrum for the production
of electricity and fuels from sunlight. New spectroscopic techniques will be developed in this project
that allow a direct correlation of molecular structural information about the ligand‐nanocrystal
interactions with the corresponding density and energetic distribution of surface defects and the
influence that these defects have on charge transport and recombination. The insight that is gained will
provide a molecular basis for the rational development of novel pathways for the of use quantum dots
in systems for solar energy transduction.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
2
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Exploring Efficient Data Movement Strategies for Exascale Systems with Deep Memory Hierarchies
Dr. Pavan Balaji, Computer Scientist
Laboratory for Scalable Parallel System Software
Mathematics and Computer Science Division
Computing, Environment and Life Sciences Directorate
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
This project will enable scientific applications to prepare for exascale architectures without
significantly increasing the programming complexity, while achieving at the same time the highest
performance possible within tight power budgets. Dramatic changes in memory architecture will lead to
multi‐level memory hierarchies and possibly heterogeneous main memory. This project involves the
development of programming constructs that enable applications to use deep memory hierarchies that
are heterogeneous both in technology and architecture.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
3
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Mapping Interactions in Hybrid Systems with Active Scanning Probes
Dr. Jesse Berezovsky, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, OH 44106
The goal of this research is to investigate nanoscale interactions in hybrid systems by harnessing
the precision and flexibility of scanning probe microscopy. Projected applications in areas such as
energy conversion, opto‐electronics, and spintronics will involve hybrid nanosystems composed of two
or more materials or nanostructures that interact electrically, optically, or magnetically. Progress in
understanding these interactions has been held back by the difficulty of accurately and efficiently
positioning the system components with nanometer precision. To overcome this challenge, this work
will employ cantilevers with integrated active magnetic and optical components. These active probes
will be controllably scanned in proximity to metal or semiconductor nanoscale structures, essentially
creating a highly tunable and versatile hybrid system. This technique will allow detailed studies of
interactions between optical resonators and plasmonic or spintronic nanostructures or between
dynamic ferromagnetic elements and quantum‐confined electron spins. The planned research offers a
significant increase of flexibility and efficiency for investigating hybrid systems over traditional
nanoassembly, accelerating progress towards future technology.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
4
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Catalyst Design for Small Molecule Activation of Energy Consequence
Dr. Theodore Betley, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
This project targets the conversion of ubiquitous small molecules (e.g. NO, CO, H O) into viable
2
precursors to synthetic fuels. Current state of the art catalyst design has not directly targeted transition
metal complexes capable of mediating the multi‐electron redox processes necessary to reduce the
overpotential (energy loss) required to achieve efficient activation of small molecule substrates. In this
vein, a new strategy has been developed for the assembly of polynuclear architectures, allowing for the
construction of tunable polymetallic centers that assemble easily within a pre‐organized template
(conferring stability, selectivity and tunability) that can effect multi‐electron redox processes for
reactions. Catalyst development has commenced with the following target design elements: (1) catalysts
feature multiple transition metal ions in the same reaction space to greatly expand accessible molecular
redox capabilities; (2) catalysts are assembled in a polynucleating ligand framework that permits control
over the cluster morphology as well as the local steric and electronic environment of the transition
metal ions within the cluster. The high tunability of the catalyst composition (metal content) and
geometric flexibility has permitted a rigorous assessment of electronic‐structure‐to‐function relationship
to be developed, further guiding synthetic efforts to realize more potent catalysts. The numerous
permutations possible showcase the high degree of generality to this approach with many synthetic
handles to tune redox and reaction chemistry. Trinuclear complexes have been synthesized featuring
homo‐ and hetero‐trinuclear cores featuring a variety of first row transition metal ions (Mn→Ni). The
trinuclear units themselves can be assembled into larger molecular frameworks, giving rise to new
materials with redox‐programmable dimensionality and expanded redox flexibility. The molecular
polynuclear platforms have been shown to successfully mediate multi‐electron redox processes in a
cooperative fashion without requiring strong chemical reductants or oxidants. The reactive molecular
complexes are being used to activate and break down the robust bonds within typical waste stream
small molecules (e.g., greenhouse gases) and convert them into value‐added commodity chemicals.
Ultimately, the catalysts developed by this approach will be required to convert energy acquired via
renewable resources into synthetic fuels as an energy storage mechanism.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
5
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
One‐Pot Catalytic Conversion of Biomass and Alkanes: Kinetically Coupling Deoxygenation and
Dehydrogenation Pathways
Dr. Aditya Bhan, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
Biomass and natural gas will progressively replace petroleum and coal as feedstocks for energy
carriers in the future. As precursors to liquid fuels, natural gas and biomass lie at opposite ends of the
chemical spectrum. Natural gas is inert and its chemical conversion involves the removal of hydrogen
while biomass contains oxygen that must also be removed. The long‐term prospect of this research is
the realization of a one‐step catalytic conversion for both biomass and natural gas to hydrocarbon fuels
by kinetically coupling biomass deoxygenation and alkane‐dehydrogenation pathways. In essence,
alkanes may serve as a hydrogen carrier for biomass deoxygenation while biomass‐derived oxygenates
may serve as the oxygen carrier for removing hydrogen from alkanes. Over zeolites, hydrogen removal
steps limit alkane conversion. That is advantageous to the proposed cooperative reactions because the
hydrogen‐desorption bottleneck and resulting high concentration of hydrogen on catalytic surfaces will
enable the deoxygenation of biomass‐derived compounds. The fundamental research will entail the
study of kinetics, mechanisms, and catalytic site architecture and electronic requirements for
bifunctional catalysts constructed with transition metal carbides and zeolites. These catalysts are
hypothesized to concurrently accomplish C‐H bond activation, deoxygenation, and carbon chain growth
chemistries. Chemical and structural characterization of the catalyst will be combined with transient and
steady state kinetic measurements and isotopic tracer methods to probe the identity, reversibility, and
kinetic relevance of elementary steps involved in concurrently processing methane and carbohydrate
molecules that mimic biomass‐derived fragments. This research effort will lead to fundamental
advancement in the science of catalysis and the practical use of simple hydrogen‐rich alkanes in biomass
deoxygenation reactions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
6
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Detection and Attribution of Regional Climate Change with a Focus on the Precursors of Droughts
Dr. Céline Bonfils, Research Scientist
Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison
Climate/Carbon Science Group
Atmospheric, Earth, and Energy Division
Physical & Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The goal of this project is to improve understanding of the nature and causes of past changes in
droughts to identify potential onset of future drought. The problem of identifying a component forced
by climate change is typically addressed using established statistical detection and attribution (D&A)
techniques. These techniques identify the characteristic "fingerprints" associated with climate change
and connect them to likely causes in the system. However, these techniques have seen little application
in drought research because of the noisy nature of the observations in this field. This project, instead of
solely focusing on changes in drought characteristics, will investigate the naturally driven and externally
forced components of known large‐scale drought precursors such as specific ocean temperature
patterns or poleward shifts in atmospheric circulation. The research will include an analysis of drought
behavior in various climate model simulations and observations; a D&A‐derived technique to investigate
the temporal changes in major oceanic precursors; an uncertainty quantification analysis based on the
1998‐2003 drought; and a rigorous D&A analysis of drought‐promoting changes in atmospheric
circulation patterns. This research will improve the understanding of drought mechanisms, establish
new avenues in regional D&A research, and examine the sensitivity of the results to specific sources of
uncertainties in the climate models, in measurements, in the climate drivers, and in the D&A methods.
Ultimately, this work will provide scientific underpinning to inform decisions on how society might adapt
to droughts in a changing climate.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
7
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Spin Wave Interactions in Metallic Ferromagnets
Dr. Kristen Buchanan, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80523
Dynamic excitations in ferromagnetic materials known as spin waves play a key role in a range of
intriguing phenomena. The goal of this project is to investigate two main directions related to spin
dynamics in metallic ferromagnets, namely the interactions between spin polarized currents and
propagating spin waves and the interplay between spin waves and lattice vibrations (phonons) in
thermally driven spin effects. Brillouin light scattering, a technique that is sensitive to both spin wave
excitations and phonons, will be used to explore the fundamental nature of these effects.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
8
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Searching for Dark Matter Axions with New High‐Frequency Tunable Microwave Cavities
Dr. Gianpaolo Carosi, Staff Scientist
Advanced Detectors Group
Nuclear and High Energy Physics Section
Physics Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The axion is a hypothetical particle that solves the strong‐CP problem in nuclear physics and may
be the dark matter of the universe. The Axion Dark Matter eXperiment (ADMX) and its sister experiment
ADMX‐High Frequency (ADMX‐HF) are designed to detect axions by using large microwave cavities
immersed in a strong magnetic field to resonantly convert the axion's rest mass into detectable photons.
The current microwave cavity structures used, based on copper plated cylinders, limit the search to
axions with masses corresponding to photons below 2 GHz. This research effort will investigate the use
of new high‐frequency tunable microwave cavities based on multi‐post geometries and new thin film
superconducting walls to boost the accessible volume and resonant factor of cavities above 2 GHz. Using
these new cavity structures in ADMX and ADMX‐HF will allow for axion dark matter searches in the
previously inaccessible mass range of 2‐10 GHz, greatly increasing the possibility of discovery.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
9
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Tracking for the New Muon g‐2 Experiment
Dr. Brendan Casey, Scientist I
DZero Department
Particle Physics Division
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL 60510
There is a discrepancy between the measured and expected values of an intrinsic property of
the muon, its magnetic dipole moment. The discrepancy could be one of the first indications of new
physics beyond the current standard model. A new experiment will be conducted at Fermilab to test this
discrepancy. The Fermilab experiment will measure the anomalous magnetic dipole moment of the
muon, referred to mathematically as g‐2, to a precision of 140 parts per billion. The goal of this project is
to design and construct new tracking detectors for the Fermilab experiment to measure the trajectories
of the decay products of the muon. The tracking detectors will help constrain systematic uncertainties in
the measurement of g‐2 and help rule out the possibility that the discrepancy is due to a problem with
the measurement. This project will define the requirements of the tracking detectors, build prototype
detectors to demonstrate the requirements are achievable, construct the final system in collaboration
with several US and international institutions, and finally, analyze the first data from the new detectors.
The tracking detectors will also expand the scope of the muon g‐2 experiment by allowing a search for
new intrinsic properties of the muon such as an electric dipole moment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
10
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Multiphasic Soft Colloids: From Fundamentals to Application of Energy Sustainability
Dr. Wei‐Ren Chen, Research and Development Staff Member
Structure and Dynamics of Soft Matter Group
Biology and Soft Matter Division
Neutron Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The goal of this research project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the structure,
dynamics and interaction of multiphasic soft colloidal systems for the design of novel materials with
desirable properties. Multiphasic soft colloids represent a new class of macromolecules with two or
more different functional groups at the periphery. Their structural heterogeneity establishes
interactions that are directional in nature, which when extended to larger length scales offer great
potential for novel emergent properties. Exploitation of these colloids as a platform for the
development of new functional materials for energy applications requires quantitative understanding of
the relationship between the chemical structure, interaction and spatial arrangement of these systems
in their collective functional state. The planned research will use a synergistic approach, integrating
material design and synthesis at the Center for Nanoscale Materials Science, advanced neutron
scattering tools at the Spallation Neutron Source, and multi‐scale simulations using the computational
resources at the National Center for Computational Science at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The
knowledge gained from this program will provide the scientific foundation required for the development
of exquisitely designed, multi‐functional soft colloidal materials with properties and functions that
address DOE's mission to develop advanced energy technologies including fuel cells, membranes for gas
and liquid separation, organic light emitting diodes and photovoltaics and supercapacitors. Theory and
computational algorithms developed for the interpretation of scattering data for this project will greatly
benefit the larger soft condensed matter science community.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
11
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Data Exploration at the Exascale
Dr. Hank Childs, Computer Systems Engineer
Visualization Group
Computer & Data Sciences Department
Computational Research Division
Computing Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
This project explores important challenges related to preserving the ability of scientists to
conduct exploratory analysis of data resulting from scientific simulations at the exascale. Because of
severe constraints on the amount of data that can be saved from exascale supercomputers, it will be
necessary to perform most of the data analysis during the run of a simulation and to sharply reduce the
volume of the data that are stored, perhaps reducing the integrity of the data that are available for
exploratory analysis after the simulation ends. Empirical methods will be used to characterize various
approaches to data reduction in terms of data integrity, providing guidelines for scientists. This project
will also research ways to visually represent loss of data integrity and resulting uncertainty.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
12
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
In‐situ Monitoring of Dynamic Phenomena During Solidification
Dr. Amy Clarke, Research and Development Scientist
Materials Technology ‐ Metallurgy Group
Materials Science and Technology Division
Associate Directorate for Experimental Physical Sciences
Principle Associate Directorate for Science, Technology and Engineering
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
This project focuses on the ability to visualize experimentally and model theoretically the
melting and solidification processes of metal alloy materials, even while at elevated temperatures. This
project will use novel tools and unique probes, such as synchrotron x‐ray and proton radiography and
tomography, at National Laboratory Facilities that have not yet been used in the United States for this
purpose. Modeling these processes will enable the prediction of the microscopic structure of metal
alloys, even under harsh environments, and will allow for new understanding of a range of energy
materials, such as wind turbine blades and lithium rechargeable batteries.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
13
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Development and Characterization of Improved Disruption and Runaway Electron Mitigation Systems
Dr. Nicolas Commaux, Experimental Plasma Physicist
Experimental Plasma Physics Group
Fusion Energy Division
Nuclear Science and Engineering Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The goal of this research is to develop techniques to mitigate disruptions in large magnetic
fusion devices. In these devices, called tokamaks, a portion of the containing magnetic field is generated
by an electrical current flowing in a high temperature plasma (ionized gas). A disruption is a rapid loss of
this current that produces a significant heat load to the walls of the plasma chamber. Disruptions are a
major challenge for large tokamaks such as the international ITER device under construction because
they can affect availability and performance. The focus of this effort is to maximize the efficiency of the
proposed disruption mitigation schemes. It will test fusion‐power‐plant relevant designs and
technologies that could be applied on ITER. Two of the more promising techniques for disruption
mitigation are gas injection and shattered pellet injection. Both methods inject large numbers of
particles to benignly dissipate the plasma energy. Shattered pellet injection is a new technique involving
the injection of a large frozen hydrogen or neon pellet that is shattered by impacting a hard surface
inside the tokamak. The solid fragments are expected to penetrate deeper into the plasma than gas,
improving the material assimilation and removing the energy faster. These techniques will be studied on
the DIII‐D National Fusion Facility at General Atomics in San Diego. The solid/gas mix during the injection
may be improved by modifying the shattering method and thus improving the efficiency of this
technique. A new diagnostic system to characterize the efficiency of the assimilation of the injected
particles will also be designed and tested. Finally, additional tunable injection systems will be installed to
study simultaneous particle injection at different locations since the injection may have to be done
through multiple systems on ITER to spread out the energy distribution.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
14
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Computational Fluid Dynamics Facility to Support Targets for the 12 GeV Program at Jefferson
Laboratory
Dr. Silviu Covrig, Staff Scientist
Experimental Hall C
Physics Division
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
Newport News, VA 23606
This project will establish a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) research program at the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (TJNAF) to investigate and standardize the performance of liquid
hydrogen targets for nuclear physics experiments. Liquid hydrogen has long been a standard target
material for fixed‐target nuclear physics experiments at accelerator facilities worldwide. In the near
future, experiments using very high intensity electron beams will require the removal of beam‐
deposited heating of up to an order of magnitude beyond that which has been achieved with previous
targets. Through CFD simulations, it should be possible to reduce target boiling effects by more than an
order of magnitude, which will be crucial for the reduction of systematic errors in planned high beam
intensity experiments. In this CFD research program, a range of experimental target designs will be
simulated and optimized, including the 5000 W target envisioned for the possible ultra‐high precision
MOLLER (Measurement Of a Lepton‐Lepton Electroweak Reaction) experiment at TJNAF, which
proposes a precision study of high‐intensity polarized electron‐electron scattering. This CFD research
program will also analyze safety issues and will develop standard procedures for operating liquid
hydrogen targets in the safest manner feasible.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
15
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Precision Measurements with Low Energy Neutrons
Dr. Christopher Crawford, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics & Astronomy
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506
The purpose of this project is to measure fundamental properties of low‐energy neutrons. We
will contribute to three experiments that will be performed at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Spallation Neutron Source, NPDGamma, Nab, and nEDM (neutron Electric Dipole Moment). The
NPDGamma experiment will characterize the role of the weak force in interactions between neutrons
and protons. The Nab experiment will measure correlations in the decay products of the neutron. In the
third experiment, namely nEDM, the electric dipole moment of neutron, which is indicative of the
separation of positive and negative charge of the neutron, will be sought. This is predicted in the
Standard Model to be extremely small. If observed at the limit of sensitivity of the nEDM experiment, it
would be a clear signature of physics beyond the Standard Model and might explain the deficiency of
antimatter in the observable universe. All three experiments require precise magnetic fields to
manipulate the spin of neutrons and helium‐3 nuclei. We have developed a technique for calculating
the optimal windings for such coils based on their geometry and magnetic field requirements. We will
construct these coils as three‐dimensional printed circuits. We will use a robotic arm to cut the exact
traces of each circuit according to our calculations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
16
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Stochastic Simulation of Complex Fluid Flows
Dr. Aleksandar Donev, Assistant Professor
Department of Mathematics
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
Computational fluctuating hydrodynamics is a relatively new and actively growing area of
computational fluid dynamics. Its growth is stimulated by advances in micro‐ and nano‐manufacturing
technologies and the development of novel materials such as nanofluids. Thermal fluctuations affect
fluid flows at small scales and need to be included in state‐of‐the‐art algorithms for fluid dynamics in a
way that is consistent with statistical mechanics. This project explores new fields where there are few, if
any, computational tools available for scientific studies in this area.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
17
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Vibrational Spectroscopy of Transient Combustion Intermediates Trapped in Helium Nanodroplets
Dr. Gary Douberly, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
The objective of this research is to isolate and stabilize transient intermediates and products of
prototype combustion reactions. This will be accomplished by Helium nanodroplet isolation (HENDI)
spectroscopy, a novel technique where liquid helium nanodroplets freeze out high energy metastable
configurations of a reacting system, permitting infrared spectroscopic characterizations of products and
intermediates that result from hydrocarbon radical reactions with molecular oxygen and other small
molecules relevant to combustion environments. The majority of these transient species have never
been directly observed in traditional spectroscopy experiments. HENDI spectroscopy will be used to
carry out the first direct observation of the elusive hydroperoxyalkyl radical (QOOH) and its oxygen
adducts (O QOOH), important in the low temperature hydrocarbon oxidation chemistry associated with
2
homogeneous charge compression ignition (HCCI) engines. HENDI will also be used to probe the
outcome of the self reactions of resonantly stabilized free radicals, which are important in the earliest
stages of soot formation. Thus, these studies may lead to an improved understanding of the detailed
mechanisms of hydrocarbon combustion resulting in more accurate predictive combustion models.
Furthermore, mid‐infrared spectral signatures of important combustion intermediates will be obtained
to develop laser diagnostic tools for modern chemical kinetics studies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
18
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Rational Design and Nanoscale Integration of Multi‐Heterostructures as Highly Efficient Photocatalysts
Dr. Xiangfeng Duan, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
The combination of dissimilar materials with nanometer‐scale dimensions can enable exciting
opportunities to precisely control their electronic and optical properties and to create a new generation
of integrated material systems with functional properties not possible in individual components. This
project will design and synthesize complex nanostructures of dissimilar materials that integrate a
nanoscale photovoltaic device with two distinct redox nanocatalysts. The interaction of light with these
nanostructures creates electron‐hole pairs that are quickly separated and transported to the integrated
nanocatalysts to enable thermodynamically unfavorable redox reactions. Systematic studies will be
carried out to develop general strategies for the synthesis of such complex nanostructures and to
investigate their fundamental electronic, optical, and photocatalytic properties. The rational design of
nanoscale architectures and seamless integration of multiple functional components in a single
nanostructure can enable efficient optical absorption, charge generation, separation, transportation and
utilization for productive redox chemistry. It therefore has the potential to enable a new generation of
highly effective photocatalysts for efficient harvest and conversion of solar energy into chemical fuel.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
19
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Neutrino Oscillations in Supernovae
Dr. Huaiyu Duan, Assistant Professor
Physics and Astronomy Department
University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87131
At the end of the life of a massive star, its core collapses under its own gravity and the star
explodes as a supernova. Supernovae are crucial to the chemical evolution of the universe. They
disseminate heavy elements into the Interstellar Medium inside which new generations of stars are
born. Although supernovae have been observed in the last several decades, only recently, with the
advances of computing technologies and the development of multi‐dimensional supernova
simulations, is the explosion mechanism of a supernova finally (close to being) understood. However,
the recent development of neutrino mixing adds a new twist to this puzzle. Neutrinos interact very
weakly with ordinary matter but carry away 99% of the total energy of a supernova. The electron‐flavor
neutrinos and antineutrinos play pivotal roles in supernova physics. It has been established by
experiments that neutrinos and antineutrinos of the electron flavor can transform or oscillate into
neutrinos of other flavors and vice versa. In this project, we will take inputs from supernova
simulations, perform large‐scale numerical simulations of neutrino oscillations in supernovae, and
investigate the potential impacts of neutrino oscillations on supernova physics. By studying neutrino
oscillations in supernovae, we will complete an important piece of the supernova puzzle and help
answer some fundamental questions such as ones about the origin of the elements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
20
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Repurposing the Saccharomyces Cerevisiae Peroxisome for Compartmentalizing Multi‐Enzyme
Pathways
Dr. John Dueber, Assistant Professor
Department of Bioengineering
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
To replace fossil fuels and other chemicals with biofuels and biomaterials from renewable
sources, microbes can be engineered to alter their metabolism to maximize production of the desired
chemicals. To do this, biosynthetic pathways from other species are added to a host organism, often
resulting in the accumulation of new chemical compounds that are detrimental to the engineered
microbe. Thus, a major challenge in microbial engineering is to enable high‐yielding biofuel production
without affecting the microorganism's health. One solution to this problem is to spatially separate
engineered metabolic pathways from the rest of the metabolic machinery within the microbial cell. In
fact, many organisms already use subcellular compartments, called organelles, to isolate cellular
functions by encapsulating components within impermeable membranes. The goal of this research is to
repurpose one of these organelles, specifically the peroxisome, for use in engineered yeasts. The
peroxisome is unique in that it is not necessary for healthy cellular growth in most environmental
conditions. Therefore, this organelle can serve as a minimal compartment where unnecessary
components are replaced by desired ones. This research will determine how the peroxisome can be
specialized for encapsulating synthetic metabolic processes that can facilitate the production of biofuels
to address DOE's mission, moving forward to the development of renewable energy sources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
21
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Containment Domains: Programming and Execution Model Support for Resiliency
Dr. Mattan Erez, Assistant Professor
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712
Extreme‐scale computing hardware cannot be effectively harnessed for scientific discovery
unless severe reliability obstacles are overcome. The combination in future fabrication technology of a
growing number of components and the decreasing inherent reliability of components will result in
error and fault rates orders of magnitude higher than those in petascale systems today. This project will
use containment domains for enabling scalable resiliency with low performance and power overheads.
Containment domains are resiliency‐specific programming constructs for combining high‐level
information and structure from the application with runtime information and services in the execution
model.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
22
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Particle Physics at the Cosmic, Intensity, and Energy Frontiers
Dr. Rouven Essig, Assistant Professor
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
Major efforts at the Intensity, Cosmic, and Energy frontiers of particle physics are rapidly
furthering our understanding of the fundamental constituents of Nature and their interactions. The
overall objectives of this research project are (1) to interpret and develop the theoretical implications of
the data collected at these frontiers and (2) to provide the theoretical motivation, basis, and ideas for
new experiments and for new analyses of experimental data. Within the Intensity Frontier, an
experimental search for a new force mediated by a GeV‐scale gauge boson will be carried out with the
A' Experiment (APEX) and the Heavy Photon Search (HPS), both at Jefferson Laboratory. Within the
Cosmic Frontier, contributions are planned to the search for dark matter particles with the Fermi
Gamma‐ray Space Telescope and other instruments. A detailed exploration will also be performed of
new direct detection strategies for dark matter particles with sub‐GeV masses to facilitate the
development of new experiments. In addition, the theoretical implications of existing and future dark‐
matter‐related anomalies will be examined. Within the Energy Frontier, the implications of the data
from the Large Hadron Collider will be investigated. Novel search strategies will be developed to aid the
search for new phenomena not described by the Standard Model of particle physics. By combining
insights from all three particle physics frontiers, this research aims to increase our understanding of
fundamental particle physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
23
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Bond Formation and Catalysis by Base‐metal Unsaturated Isocyanides
Dr. Joshua Figueroa, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
The goal of this project is to use the inexpensive, middle 3d‐transition metals, manganese and
cobalt, as high‐efficiency reagents and catalysts for chemical‐bond formation. A specific aim of this
research is the development and mechanistic elucidation of manganese‐based electrocatalysts for
carbon dioxide (CO ) reduction and fixation. Efficient activation and recycling of atmospheric CO
2 2
remains a significant contemporary challenge as global demand for carbon‐based fuel sources continues
to increase. Experiments and studies of this project focus specifically on the development and
mechanistic elucidation of a new, manganese‐based system for electrochemical reduction of CO to
2
water and carbon monoxide (CO). The new manganese catalysts proposed here feature m‐terphenyl
isocyanides as supporting groups. These isocyanides and their transition metal complexes represent a
new class of molecular species that are inspired from classic, binary transition‐metal carbonyls, which
are by themselves catalysts for important chemical transformations. The m‐terphenyl isocyanide
complexes studied in this project offer a robust, but highly modular, platform for electrocatalyst
development and optimization. Such ligand‐directed control is lacking in metal carbonyl systems. In
addition, the protective and tunable nature of m‐terphenyl isocyanides allows for detailed assessment
of the elementary steps operative in CO reduction processes. The second aim of this research concerns
2
the elucidation of new bond formation processes using cobalt isocyanide‐containing molecules. The
chemical properties of recently discovered and unique cobalt m‐terphenyl isocyanide complexes will be
especially applied to CO remediation.
2
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
24
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Providing the Roadmap for New Element Discoveries and New Chemistries of the Heaviest Elements
Dr. Charles Folden III, Assistant Professor
Cyclotron Institute
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
Transactinides are the heaviest elements at the bottom of the periodic table, and each must be
produced artificially using nuclear fusion reactions between a projectile and target. In the 2000s, the
most important projectile for forming heavy elements has been 48Ca because of its large excess of
neutrons. All possible elements that can be formed with 48Ca projectiles have already been discovered,
and it is not clear which other projectile could be used to discover the next new element. This project
will systematically study the interactions of a variety of projectiles, most importantly 50Ti and 54Cr, in
nuclear reactions with much higher production rates than those used for transactinides. This will help
determine the most important influences on production rate with the goal of aiding in the discovery of
the next new element. Additionally, this project will work to develop new extraction chromatography
systems and implement new automated equipment to investigate the physical chemistry of the heaviest
elements. These efforts will help guide heavy element research in the coming decade as scientists
attempt to expand the limits of the periodic table.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
25
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Ultrafast X‐ray Studies of Intramolecular and Interfacial Charge Migration
Dr. Oliver Gessner, Senior Scientist
Ultrafast X‐ray Science Laboratory
Chemical Sciences Division
Energy and Environmental Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Chemically engineered devices play an increasingly important role in the development of
sustainable energy production and storage solutions. Molecular assemblies can harvest sunlight and use
the absorbed energy to produce electricity or to catalyze chemical reactions. This project addresses the
need for an atomic‐level understanding of light‐induced charge generation and migration in molecular
networks, in polymer blends, and at organic‐inorganic interfaces. Understanding these processes is a
prerequisite to exploit the potential of molecular‐electronics‐based energy solutions. Experimental
techniques using intense, ultrashort x‐ray pulses will monitor the light‐induced creation and transport of
charges in complex molecular systems in real time and from the perspective of specific atomic sites. The
objective is to provide a predictive understanding of the most fundamental working principles and
bottlenecks of molecular electronic function.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
26
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Modulating Thermal Transport Phenomena in Nanostructures via Elastic Strain at Extreme Limits of
Strength
Dr. Daniel Gianola, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Nanoscale materials fabricated with nearly pristine crystal structure are often endowed with
ultra‐strength behavior, where material failure occurs at a significant fraction of its ideal limit. The
thermal conductivity exhibited by such materials is also uniquely affected by the high surface‐to‐volume
ratio at the nanoscale. The juxtaposition of the vastly increased dynamic range of elastic strain available
in ultra‐strength nanomaterials and altered thermal transport shows promise for tunable thermal
properties. This project aims to exploit these properties of high‐strength nanostructures to elucidate the
coupling between large mechanical strains and thermal conductivity (both electron and phonon) leading
to better understanding and control of the thermal performance in these materials. Unique fabrication
methods to produce nanosized, quasi‐defect‐free single crystals and modern nanomechanical testing
will be used to identify the size‐dependent dynamic range of elastic strain and understand deformation
mechanisms near the ideal limit. Identifying and quantifying thermal transport phenomena as a
function of mechanical strain in these nanostructures will open the door to using elastic strain
engineering in high‐strength nanomaterials to tune thermal transport. The results of these
investigations will be used to improve the performance, efficiency, and versatility of advanced thermal
management and energy conversion devices with tunable response.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
27
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Holography, Gravity and Condensed Matter
Dr. Sean Hartnoll, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94305
Holographic duality is a set of a sophisticated theoretical ideas and tools that has been
developed over the last decade as part of string theory. The goal of this project is to harness the insights
afforded by holographic duality to shed light on challenging theoretical problems in the physics of exotic
materials by dually reformulating the problems in terms of the seemingly unrelated dynamics of
gravitating spacetimes. At the same time, this project will investigate novel phenomena in fundamental
gravitational physics inspired by a condensed matter perspective. Experiments over the past three
decades have uncovered families of materials deviating from the textbook behavior of metals. It has
proved difficult to understand these materials with conventional theoretical techniques because the
electrons in the metals are all strongly quantum entangled with one another. Holographic duality is able
to reformulate the dynamics of certain such strongly correlated phases of matter as the gravitational
ripples of a black hole event horizon. This project will use and develop further holographic techniques
to obtain controlled theoretical descriptions of so‐called quantum critical metals and of phases of
matter exhibiting `fractionalized excitations,' wherein the electron appears to break up into multiple
pieces. Novel experimental probes will be proposed. By combining the physical intuition of traditionally
distinct arenas of physics, spacetime physics and condensed matter, this project has the potential to
uncover new approaches to critical problems in both fields that have remained stubbornly present for
many years.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
28
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Model‐Data Fusion Approaches for Retrospective and Predictive Assessment of the Pan‐Arctic Scale
Permafrost Carbon Feedback to Global Climate
Dr. Daniel Hayes, Research Scientist
Ecosystem Simulation Group
Environmental Sciences Division
Biological & Environmental Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Land areas spanning the northern high latitudes currently store enormous quantities of carbon
as frozen organic matter in the region's soils and peatlands. The long‐term fate of this carbon will be
determined by changing temperatures already observed in these environments. These same
environments are projected to warm faster than most other places on Earth over the next century.
Rising temperatures will result in more and faster thawing of frozen organic matter. Once thawed, this
carbon‐rich material is subject to degradation by microbial organisms and/or transport through runoff
to aquatic systems. Coupled with these anticipated changes is the role of disturbance from fire, invasive
species, and the changing land surface resulting from soil thaw. The combination of global change and
disturbance will alter historic patterns of carbon cycling with potentially large additions of greenhouse
gasses to the atmosphere, thereby further increasing temperatures. The current scientific
understanding of these processes in northern environments is quite limited and the existing knowledge
is not consolidated in any one place or system. Data and information exist in different forms and in
different places, ranging from satellite‐based measurements to individual cores of soils taken for various
research purposes. This project intends to survey, integrate, model and evaluate existing information
on key processes that control the transfer of carbon from frozen organic material to atmospheric
greenhouse gasses (mostly carbon dioxide and methane). The increased understanding that is expected
from this project will help to design and implement future state‐of‐the‐art scientific activities by
providing priorities to different research areas and also will inform future decisions regarding energy
and natural resources of the Arctic.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
29
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Utilization of Protein Film Electrochemistry to Characterize the Mechanisms Imparting Aerotolerance
and Bidirectionality in Soluble, Multimeric [NiFe]‐Hydrogenases
Dr. Anne Jones, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
The overall goal of this research is to better understand how structural features control
functional aspects of an important class of enzymes called soluble [NiFe]‐hydrogenases. These enzymes
mediate a reversible two‐electron reduction of protons to form hydrogen gas. Studies of these enzymes
may lead to improvements in bio‐hydrogen production/utilization. Additionally, they serve as models for
more complex multielectron redox enzymes such as those involved in nitrogen and carbon dioxide
reduction. Two properties of [NiFe]‐hydrogenases relevant to energy applications will be investigated:
(1) What structural features influence the catalytic bias of the enzyme? and (2) What structural features
determine the susceptibility of these enzymes to inactivation by molecular oxygen? [NiFe]‐hydrogenases
with a broad range of activities will be isolated from biologically diverse sources and characterized using
a technique called protein film electrochemistry. Structural variants of these enzymes with precisely
targeted changes will also be generated, characterized and compared with the results for the wild type
enzymes to address the two questions above. The comprehensive understanding of the structural
features controlling catalytic properties that result from this research can guide the development of
improved redox enzymes and/or other novel bio‐inspired catalysts.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
30
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Graphene Membranes with Tunable Nanometer‐Scale Pores
Dr. Rohit Karnik, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Graphene, a one‐atom thick membrane of hexagonally bonded carbon atoms, is one of the
strongest materials known and is impervious to the diffusion of even helium gas. The potential for
creation of tunable nanometer‐scale pores in graphene, combined with its other properties, make it a
promising material for improving selectivity, permeability, and energy efficiency in a diverse range of
membrane separation and sensing applications. The objectives of this work are to (1) systematically
study the effect of ion irradiation, nitrogen doping, and chemical oxidation to create tunable,
nanometer‐scale pores in single and multilayer graphene membranes and (2) elucidate the transport
characteristics of the resulting membranes. High‐resolution imaging will be used to study the pore
structures, and transport measurements will be performed on large‐area membranes as well as on
single pores. The study will result in fundamental understanding of the relationship between fabrication
methods, pore structures, and transport properties of graphene membranes, which may lead to
significant advances in a wide range of separations applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
31
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Modeling Astrophysical Explosions and the Nucleosynthesis of the Heavy Elements
Dr. Daniel Kasen, Assistant Professor
Astronomy Department
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
The heavier elements in the Universe were created and dispersed in the supernova explosion of
stars, within which are realized extreme conditions for nuclear and neutrino processes. Astrophysical
experiments provide a rich and constraining data set, but our theoretical understanding of supernovae
and heavy element production remains incomplete. The goals of this project are to advance numerical
simulations of astrophysical explosions and use them to connect the nuclear theory of supernovae to
current and future experimental programs. The focus is on applying high performance computing to
model the transport of radiation (both neutrino and electromagnetic) in core collapse supernovae and
the outflows from neutron star mergers. General aims of this work include (1) further defining the
explosive astrophysical environments that govern the nucleosynthesis of heavy and rare isotopes; (2)
providing the means to test supernova explosion/nucleosynthesis calculations against the spectroscopic
data from optical and x‐ray telescopes; (3) preparing the way for more realistic treatments of neutrino
interactions, with the ultimate goal of making supernovae a testing ground for probing fundamental
neutrino physics; and (4) advancing the applicability of large scale computing to solve problems in
nuclear physics, through the development of parallel algorithms of the type incorporated in our
simulation codes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
32
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Large‐Scale Modeling of Intense Short‐Pulse Laser Interaction for HEDLP
Dr. Andreas Kemp, Staff Scientist
Fusion Energy Sciences Program
Physics Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The objective of this research is to develop an integrated description of Petawatt‐class laser‐
matter interactions that covers plasma physics from near‐vacuum up to 1000x solid density, resolving
time scales from sub‐femto‐ to nanoseconds, i.e., from below the laser period to the hydrodynamic
response time of heated targets. Studying nonlinear many‐body physics in the laboratory at the
relativistic limit ‐ driven by intense, short laser pulses ‐ is a grand challenge. It relates High Energy
Density Laboratory Physics (HEDLP) to fundamental astrophysical problems like gamma‐ray bursts and
the origin of cosmic rays, and it has applications ranging from fusion energy to controlled amplification
of desirable radiation or particle beams. Computer modeling is an essential part of the design and
interpretation of HEDLP experiments. The key difficulty arises from the many physical scales involved.
These are set by microscopic physics in solid‐density plasma on the one hand, e.g., filamentation of the
laser beam in blow‐off plasma, and the macroscopic interaction volumes and times on the other.
Currently, there is no self‐consistent computer model available, and physics understanding of kinetic
transport is incomplete. The proposed research will close this gap with a theoretical approach to
understanding the fundamental kinetic physics of laser interaction and electron transport near critical
density, integrating all essential physics that affect the outcome of a short‐pulse laser‐matter interaction
experiment. This approach goes beyond the current paradigm of combining hydrodynamic models with
separate laser absorption physics and electron‐transport models. It will also be synergistic with several
ongoing efforts on high‐energy‐density physics, e.g., fast‐ignition of inertial confinement fusion targets.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
33
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Modeling of Photoexcited Process at Interfaces of Functionalized Quantum Dots
Dr. Svetlana Kilina, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
North Dakota State University
Fargo, ND 58108
The main obstacle impeding the path towards development of efficient quantum‐dot (QD)
based materials for solar energy conversion and lighting applications is a limited understanding of
fundamental process that occur at the surfaces and interfaces of these nanomaterials subsequent to
photoexcitation. The objective of this project is to fill the gap in the present understanding of the role of
quantum‐dot surfaces in light‐driven physicochemical processes by establishing state‐of‐the‐art
computational methods capable of describing photoexcitation in the nanosized systems and their
interfaces at the atomistic level. Such methods will allow for a systematic theoretical analysis on the
effects of a soft layer of organic ligands and/or a shell of a different semiconductor covering the QD
surface on the morphology, electronic structure, optical response, charge/energy transfer, and
excitation dissipation in quantum dots. This will also provide insight into the extent to which we can
control radiative and nonradiative process and electronic transport in these systems by chemical
modification of the QD surfaces. The acquired theoretical knowledge will allow for a better explanation
and interpretation of experimental data and will facilitate rational design of new nanostructures with
desired optical, transport, and light harvesting properties that are fundamental to a myriad of clean‐
energy technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
34
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Electron Dynamics in Nanostructures in Strong Laser Fields
Dr. Matthias Kling, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS 66506
This project aims to investigate novel physical effects in nanomaterials in strong laser fields. The
laser fields will be strong enough to pull out and accelerate electrons from the nanoparticles and to
transiently modify the material's electronic properties. The project aims to advance the fundamental
understanding of how the collective electron motion in strong laser fields is established, how its precise
evolution depends on the driving light waveform, how the material properties are influenced by the
strong field, and over which pathways and timescales the collective motion decays. The laser‐driven
collective electron dynamics can unfold on attosecond time scales (one attosecond is a billionth of a
billionth of a second) and will be traced by employing attosecond nanoplasmonic streaking
spectroscopy. The studies will focus on isolated dielectric, semiconductor and metal nanoparticles. The
project can uncover new functionalities of nanomaterials and enable transformative photonic
applications of nanostructured devices for the development of sustainable energy sources and ultrafast
information and computation technology.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
35
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Probing High Temperature Superconductors with Magnetometry in Ultrahigh Magnetic Fields
Dr. Lu Li, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
The objective of this research is to investigate the high‐field magnetic properties of high
temperature superconductors, materials that conduct electricity without loss. A technique known as
high‐resolution torque magnetometry will be developed to directly measure the magnetization of high
temperature superconductors. This technique will be implemented using the 100 Tesla pulsed magnetic
field facility that is part of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Los Alamos National
Laboratory. This research will address unanswered questions about the interplay between magnetism
and superconductivity, determine the electronic structure of high temperature superconductors, and
shed light on the mechanism of high temperature superconductivity and on potential applications of
these materials in areas such as energy generation and power transmission.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
36
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Optimal Cosmological Measurements with Weak Gravitational Lensing
Dr. Rachel Mandelbaum, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Weak gravitational lensing is the most direct way to observe distributions of dark matter in the
universe. Weak gravitational lensing can also be used to study dark energy, which causes accelerated
expansion of the universe and a slowing of the growth of large‐scale structures (such as galaxy clusters)
containing dark matter. Several large astronomical imaging surveys have been planned to measure
weak gravitational lensing more precisely than ever before, eventually culminating in the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope (LSST). These imaging surveys gain in power when combined with spectroscopic
surveys like the ongoing Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS). The purpose of this project is to
carry out measurements of weak gravitational lensing and then combine these results with other
cosmological observations to identify optimal ways of constraining cosmological parameters and the
nature of dark energy. The results will ensure that next‐generation dark energy experiments realize
their full potential.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
37
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Computational Modeling and Design of Radiation‐Tolerant Materials for Fusion
Dr. Jaime Marian, Staff Scientist
Condensed Matter and Materials Science Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
In nuclear fusion environments, materials are subjected to extreme conditions of radiation,
temperature and mechanical load. Over time, this results in performance degradation to extents that
may render these materials unsuitable for the purpose for which they were originally designed. The
objectives of this research are to use theory, modeling and simulation to predict materials performance
over the expected lifetime of fusion devices. This will result in an economical yet scientifically based way
to test different design alternatives, suggest component improvements, and provide fusion plant design
optimization. This research will advance the current state of the art in computational modeling one step
further toward a `materials‐by‐design' strategy for energy applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
38
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Metabolism and Evolution of a Biofuel‐Producing Microbial Coculture
Dr. James McKinlay, Assistant Professor
Department of Biology
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
Some microbes can convert renewable resources such as carbohydrates and sunlight into
biofuels. Therefore, they offer an urgently needed alternative to non‐renewable fuels. Most research
efforts in this area have focused on genetically engineering individual microbial species to improve
biofuel production. However, a lesson can be taken from nature, where multiple microbial species help
each other to thrive on food sources such as plant residues that the individual species can not use on
their own. Furthermore, mixtures of specialized microbes can sometimes outperform a single
engineered strain for producing chemicals of value to society. This research will make use of a mixture of
two microbial species (a coculture) that work together using sugar and energy from sunlight to produce
more hydrogen gas biofuel than either microbe could by itself. A major challenge in using cocultures is
ensuring that the different species maintain a long‐term cooperative relationship. This research will
stabilize such cooperation by forcing each microbe to provide a nutrient that the other requires to
survive. This approach enables experiments that will decipher how the metabolisms of the two species
interact and thereby how they can be optimized for biofuel production. Studying the evolution of the
microbes in the coculture will also lead to the discovery of traits that enhance biofuel production. This
information will ultimately lead to the design and engineering of tailor‐made microbial mixtures for the
economical production of hydrogen gas and other biofuels from renewable resources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
39
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
A Ruler To Measure The Universe: Probing Dark Energy with Baryon Acoustic Oscillations
Dr. Nikhil Padmanabhan, Associate Professor
Department of Physics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
Understanding the acceleration of the expansion of the Universe and the nature of the "dark
energy" responsible is one of the principal challenges in cosmology today. This research aims to
constrain the properties of this dark energy with large astronomical surveys, using sound waves frozen
in the early Universe (baryon acoustic oscillations or BAO) as a ruler to measure the expansion of the
Universe. This work organized along two themes. The first is an analysis of currently ongoing surveys
like the Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS) to obtain precision measurements of the
acceleration of the Universe. BOSS will survey 1.5 million galaxies by 2014 and will produce the
definitive low redshift BAO measurement, improving on current constraints by factors of two and more.
The second theme of this work is to develop techniques to enable the next generation of these surveys
to achieve their full potential in terms of precision measurements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
40
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Nuclear Physics on the Road to FRIB: Enhancing Direct‐Reaction Measurements Through High‐
Resolution Coincidence Experiments
Dr. Steven Pain, Research and Development Associate
Experimental Nuclear Astrophysics Group
Physics Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
"What is the origin of the elements in the cosmos? What are the nuclear reactions that drive
stars and stellar explosions?" ‐ These are among the priority questions highlighted by the Nuclear
Science Advisory Committee. A powerful tool in addressing such questions is to study nuclear reactions
using beams of exotic, short‐lived nuclei to understand how nuclear properties evolve with proton‐ and
neutron‐number and to help determine the role exotic nuclei play in generating energy and synthesizing
elements in exploding stars. The focus of this research is to significantly enhance the sensitivity of direct‐
reaction experiments on exotic nuclei by simultaneously measuring the gamma rays and charged
particles that are emitted during the reaction process. Specifically, these measurements will be
performed by coupling the resolving power of Gammasphere and ORRUBA (Oak Ridge Rutgers
University Barrel Array), two of the highest efficiency and resolution arrays for detecting, respectively,
gamma rays and charged particles from nuclear reactions. This powerful system will use beams of rare
nuclei produced at the ATLAS (Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator System) facility (Argonne National
Laboratory) to significantly increase the experimental sensitivity required to study these exotic reaction
processes. The resulting sensitivity gain will improve the extrapolation of nuclear structure models to
even more exotic nuclei and enhance the reliability of calculations that simulate creation of heavy
elements in supernovae. The experience gained through these studies will become a stepping‐stone to
the next‐generation of experiments that could be performed at a future Facility for Rare Isotope Beams
(FRIB).
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
41
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Spontaneous Generation of Rotation in Tokamak Plasmas
Dr. Felix Parra Diaz, Assistant Professor
Department of Nuclear Science & Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The tokamak is one of the most promising fusion energy concepts. Tokamaks have
demonstrated excellent performance in a variety of regimes, and the values of several figures of merit
(the stored energy and the time that the injected energy remains within the machine) improve
considerably in the presence of plasma rotation. The plasma can rotate freely because the tokamak has
axial symmetry, i.e., it is doughnut shaped. In most experimental tokamaks, rotation is generated
externally by injecting neutral particles at high speed that collide with the plasma. This injection
mechanism is inefficient in the large tokamaks that are needed for energy production, making the
spontaneous rotation observed in the absence of external momentum injection an attractive
alternative. This spontaneous rotation may seem counter‐intuitive because tokamaks are symmetric and
do not have an obvious preferred direction. The problem is subtle and requires understanding of the
delicate symmetries in an axisymmetric plasma. The objectives of this project are to develop the
theoretical and numerical tools to study and predict spontaneous rotation in tokamaks and, using these
tools, to design new configurations that exploit spontaneous rotation to improve performance. The
theoretical results obtained during the research will be checked against experimental observations
systematically to validate these completely new modeling tools. With the new insights gained, a
tokamak that will rotate to high speed in the absence of external momentum sources will be designed.
No previous tokamak has been built to optimize rotation in the absence of external injection, and this
new design criterion may open new avenues to better performance.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
42
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Improved Sensitivity and Utility of Metaproteomics Analyses
Dr. Samuel Payne, Senior Informatics Scientist
Biological Separations and Mass Spectrometry Group
Biological Sciences Division
Fundamental and Computational Sciences Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
Microbial communities are found in virtually any environment. Understanding the relationship
between microbes and their environment is key to the Department of Energy's goal of manipulating
microorganisms for biofuel production. Microorganisms use proteins as a means to interact with their
natural environments and digest their food to grow and survive. Therefore, analyzing proteins from
microbial communities facilitates understanding the relationship between microbes and their
environment. Mass spectrometry is a powerful technique to identify proteins in complex biological
samples such as the microbes that constitute an environmental community. The objective of this project
is to develop novel computational methods to dramatically improve the ability to detect and identify
new proteins in these complex samples. Current protein identification methods require the use of
protein databases to infer the function of the proteins present in the sample under study. The methods
that will be developed in this project take advantage of the similarity among proteins that perform
comparable functions in different organisms, circumventing the need for protein databases. These
studies will focus on the cow rumen environment, where the microbial community degrades a variety of
renewable resources such as plant residue. A final goal of the project is to improve the ability to identify
the species of origin for newly discovered proteins within the cow rumen bacterial community. In a
natural environment with thousands of different organisms present, this complex process is crucial for
understanding the specialized roles that individual microbes play within the community and how they
convert plant material into biofuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
43
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Systems Approach to Engineering Cyanobacteria for Biofuel Production
Dr. Jennifer Reed, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
Most of the energy consumed in the U.S. is derived from non‐renewable fuels (petroleum and
natural gas), with a significant fraction of this energy being used for transportation. To reduce the
amount of oil used to satisfy transportation energy needs in the U.S. and to alleviate our dependence on
foreign sources of oil, renewable sources of transportation fuels are needed. Cyanobacteria offer a
promising route for directly converting solar energy and carbon dioxide into biofuels. Certain
cyanobacterial strains can be engineered to produce butanol, a biofuel that is compatible with the
existing infrastructure for fuel transportation and use. The objectives of this research are to integrate
computational modeling and experimental approaches to guide the engineering of cyanobacteria with
improved butanol production. New computational approaches will be developed to facilitate the design
of experiments, predict their outcomes, and evaluate the results. In this way, this project will identify
genetic engineering strategies for improving butanol production in cyanobacteria. Experiments will
subsequently be performed to construct and evaluate new engineered cyanobacterial strains. The
developed approaches will be systematically applied to identify engineering strategies for improving
production of a variety of biofuels in five other microorganisms, supporting the U.S. Department of
Energy's mission for developing renewable ways of producing advanced biofuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
44
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Early Time Dynamics in Heavy‐Ion Collisions
Dr. Paul Romatschke, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
Currently, there is no dynamic model to describe the evolution of a "Quark‐Gluon Plasma," the
system created just after the collision of two heavy ions during experiments at the Relativistic Heavy‐
Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). After the collision, the plasma initially is far
from equilibrium. It consists of many particles that interact strongly and therefore cannot be simulated
with any known existing technique. However, for reasons not fully understood, the plasma eventually
comes into equilibrium, at which point it can be described using hydrodynamics. The aim of this project
is to model the initial, pre‐equilibrium stage following a collision of heavy nuclei together with its
coming into equilibrium. To achieve this, a recent development from string theory known as
gauge/gravity duality is employed to model the two approaching nuclei as two approaching gravitational
shock waves in a space‐time that has a negative cosmological constant (known as Anti‐de‐Sitter). To
study the equilibration of the plasma, it will be simulated by solving Einstein's equations for this problem
in general relativity numerically. Once the numerical results are available, it will be possible to extract
important information such as when the plasma can be described by hydrodynamics and what its local
pressure and fluid velocities are. This information will help to eliminate many unknowns in current
hydrodynamic models of experimental data from the RHIC and the LHC, thus opening the door to extract
precision information about material properties (such as the viscosity) of the underlying fundamental
theory of strong interactions, Quantum Chromodynamics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
45
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Combining Scanning Probe Microscopy and Synchrotron Radiation for Nanoscale Imaging with
Chemical, Electronic and Magnetic Contrast
Dr. Volker Rose, Assistant Physicist
Microscopy Group
X‐ray Science Division
Advanced Photon Source
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
The objective of this research is to develop a novel, high‐resolution microscopy technique for
imaging of nanoscale materials with chemical, electronic, and magnetic contrast. It will combine the sub‐
nanometer spatial resolution of scanning probe microscopy with the chemical, electronic, and magnetic
sensitivity of synchrotron radiation. The proposed development will drastically increase the spatial
resolution of current state‐of‐the‐art x‐ray microscopy from only tens of nanometers down to atomic
resolution. The technique will enable fundamentally new methods of characterization, which will be
applied to the study of energy materials, nanoscale magnetic systems, and site‐specific heterogeneous
catalysis. A better understanding of these phenomena at the nanoscale has great potential to improve
the conversion efficiency of quantum energy devices, lead to advances in future data storage
applications, and yield more efficient catalytic reactions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
46
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Assembling Microorganisms into Energy Converting Materials
Dr. Ozgur Sahin, Associate Professor
Department of Biological Sciences
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
This project will integrate microorganisms capable of reversible energy transduction in response
to changing relative humidity with non‐biological materials to create hybrid energy conversion systems.
While plants and many other biological organisms have developed structures that are extraordinarily
effective in converting changes in relative humidity into mechanical energy, engineered energy
transduction systems rarely take advantage of this powerful phenomenon. Owing to their micrometer‐
scale dimensions, bacterial spores are amenable to integration into macroscopic structures with desired
micro‐architectures through directed‐ or self‐assembly. Thus, the objective is to create robust and
scalable energy conversion materials using bacterial spores as the key biomolecular material responsible
for energy conversion. A suite of experimental platforms including atomic force microscopy and micro‐
electromechanical systems will be used to investigate (1) how to assemble hybrid spore‐rubber latex
structures that efficiently generate electricity by converting energy from evaporation of water and (2)
how the interaction between water and spore nanostructure imposes limits on energy conversion.
Progress can provide opportunities to tap into new forms of renewable energy and environmentally
friendly energy storage.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
47
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Dielectric Ceramics in Nanosheet Form
Dr. Tina Salguero, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
Dielectric ceramic materials have properties that make them important components in a wide
range of technologies, including capacitors, microwave communication systems, power conditioning,
and thermoelectrics. The aim of this project is to create and study these ceramics as freestanding
nanosheets, a non‐natural form of these materials. Nanosheets are characterized as being fewer than
ten nanometers in thickness and up to tens of micrometers in lateral dimensions. This "two‐
dimensional" morphology provides a unique opportunity to better understand the properties of
dielectric ceramics down to monolayer thickness and to examine the roles of surface functionalization
and interface interactions in these systems. This project includes the preparation of MTiO and MRuO
3 3
nanosheets (M = metal) using innovative synthetic strategies, characterization of their dielectric and
ferroelectric properties, and the development of solution‐based processing methods that can lead to
hybrid materials containing nanosheet components.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
48
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
From Cosmological Observations to Fundamental Interactions
Dr. Leonardo Senatore, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94305
This research spans a wide range of topics within cosmology and has the purpose of enabling us
to learn about very fundamental physics from astronomical observations. In the first part, techniques
known as 'effective field theory' will be used to study the effects of processes that took place in the very
early phase of the history of our Universe when it expanded rapidly and enormously, the very beginning
of the Big Bang. These effects propagate during the development of the Universe over time and result in
properties that can be observed today through various astronomical measurements. The improved
precision of these measurements renders inadequate the previous analysis techniques. This calls for a
new tool, 'effective field theory,' which has a proven track record in the particle physics context but has
not yet been fully applied to cosmological physics. This tool allows the study of all possible interactions
relevant during early inflation towards the determination of their resulting imprint on the current
Universe. Additionally, it allows a study of the effect of compact dense concentrations of matter on the
development of structures in the Universe such as galaxies. The second part of the program will apply
directly to the astronomical data the theoretical understanding realized via the first part. This entails a
development and application to data of new analysis techniques aimed at the search for new signatures
of early inflation. One such technique is the analysis of the statistics of the so‐called 'primordial
perturbations.' By using these sophisticated techniques to quantify the effects of inflation on what we
may see today, this research program will allow scientists to use current and future astronomical data to
explore the remarkable window onto what happened in the mysterious and enigmatic birth of our
Universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
49
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Engineering High Field Superconducting Materials for Frontier Accelerator Technology
Dr. Tengming Shen, Associate Scientist
Superconducting Materials Department
Technical Division
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL 60510
The objective of this project is to transform high‐field superconductors, particularly
Bi Sr CaCu O , a high‐temperature superconducting material that has magnetic field upper limits
2 2 2 x
surpassing 100 Tesla at 4.2 K and can be fabricated into a multifilamentary round wire, to practical
magnet conductors that can be used to generate fields above 20 Tesla for the next generation of
accelerators. Studies will focus on (1) understanding the micro‐ and nano‐structures that produce high
critical current density J in long‐length conductors through extensive electromagnetic measurements
c
and innovative micro‐structural characterizations; (2) advancing high‐temperature superconducting
magnet engineering through designing, fabricating, and testing Bi Sr CaCu O insert coils that reach 30
2 2 2 x
Tesla in a useful aperture of >30 mm. This research will result in a high‐performance, 20‐50 Tesla class
conductor for the next generation of accelerators and spectrometers for medical imaging and advanced
materials research. The fundamental understanding gained of superconductor synthesis and how
nanostructure underpins the superconducting property will provide insights for the development of a
large class of superconducting materials for magnet and energy applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
50
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Advanced Simulation Tools for Muon‐Based Accelerators
Dr. Pavel Snopok, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Illinois Institute of Technology
Chicago, IL 60616
The objective of this project is to develop new modeling tools based on modern software
frameworks, G4beamline and COSY Infinity, and to incorporate the most accurate theoretical
calculations and experimental data available for crucial and not‐yet‐considered physics processes
specific to muon accelerators. This study will substantially enhance the confidence that the tools used
in assessing the feasibility of a muon collider or a neutrino factory will accurately represent the
performance of a real machine. This work is critical to the support of long‐range exploratory physics
work aimed at developing new concepts. To pursue the computationally intensive analysis techniques
required by this research, high‐performance computing and general‐purpose computation on graphics
processing units will be employed. Tools developed during the project will be used on a daily basis to
perform simulations that explore, evaluate, and validate the design of a muon collider that is the
centerpiece of the national Muon Accelerator Program. Computer codes will be made accessible to the
scientific community and will also be applicable to other existing and future muon facilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
51
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Trimodal Tapping Mode Atomic Force Microscopy: Simultaneous 4D Mapping of Conservative and
Dissipative Probe‐Sample Interactions of Energy‐Relevant Materials
Dr. Santiago Solares, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
This project aims to develop a multifrequency atomic force microscopy method with which it
will be possible to perform rapid measurements of the conservative and dissipative forces between a
sharp probe and a sample surface simultaneously as the sample topography is recorded. The new
technique will have four‐dimensional capabilities, allowing force measurement as a function of the three
spatial coordinates and vertical velocity of the probe. The method will be applied to characterize the
deformation‐dependent electromechanical response of fuel‐cell alkaline anion exchange membranes
under accelerated degradation conditions as a function of temperature, relative humidity, and
mechanical strain. The project will include both experimental and computational activities and will
enable the use of a unique scanning probe technology to study the mechanisms through which fuel cell
and battery materials degrade and to quantify their loss in performance along the way. Such
understanding will be useful in the development of new, better performing materials or in providing
guidance in extending the useful life of existing materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
52
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Deciphering the Genetic and Molecular Underpinnings of Carbohydrate‐Degrading Systems in Ruminal
Bacteria
Dr. Garrett Suen, Assistant Professor
Department of Bacteriology
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53715
Biofuels like ethanol can be obtained from cellulose present in plant cell walls. A challenge in the
production of biofuels is the efficient breakdown of cellulose into simple sugars. Current industrial
approaches rely on cocktails of cellulose‐degrading enzymes. These strategies can be improved by
identifying and characterizing more active enzymes. Arguably the most optimized natural cellulose
degrading system is found in the rumen of domesticated cows. The rumen contains a diverse group of
bacteria with highly active enzymes that digest cellulose in feed and convert this energy source into
nutrients usable by the cow. This research will characterize the mechanism through which three bacteria
from the rumen degrade cellulose. Each of these bacteria employs different strategies for cellulose
degradation and will provide contrasting models that can increase our understanding of this
fundamental process. This work will leverage existing genomic sequences for these bacteria to identify
the genes and enzymes relevant for cellulose degradation. Importantly, these enzymes will be purified
and biochemically tested for their capacity to degrade cellulose. Novel enzymes characterized in this
way will not only expand our current set of cellulose‐degrading enzymes but will also provide insights
into how these specialized microbes accomplish cellulose degradation in natural systems. The results of
this research will advance the DOE mission for the production of advanced biofuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
53
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Linking the Codependence of Grain Boundary Structure and Density to Defect Evolution Mechanisms
During Radiation Damage
Dr. Mitra Taheri, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Development of materials that can withstand high doses of radiation is a key goal for the future
of nuclear reactor operation. There has been an increased interest in nanocrystalline materials as
candidates for nuclear reactor components because of their increased strength and theoretical
resistance to radiation damage, but there is still not agreement about how grain boundary structure and
proximity influence the development of damage. The objective of this work is to develop an
understanding of the mutual dependence of damage accumulation on atomic scale grain boundary
structure and density during irradiation. An in‐situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) approach
will be taken to measure damage evolution kinetics during irradiation of model nanocrystalline
materials. This technique will be used in conjunction with high‐resolution analytical tools to elucidate
structure and composition of these selected materials following irradiation. The information gained
from these in‐situ and ex‐situ studies will yield mechanistic understanding of defect incubation and
clustering that occurs during irradiation. These experiments will be enhanced by simulations for a more
complete understanding of fundamental mechanisms at time and length scales that would otherwise be
inaccessible with experimental techniques. The results obtained from this research will give rise to a
predictive understanding of microstructural features in candidate materials for future advanced nuclear
energy applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
54
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Jet Probes of a New State of Matter
Dr. Ivan Vitev, Staff Scientist
Nuclear and Particle Physics, Astrophysics and Cosmology Group
Theoretical Division
Associate Directorate for Theory, Simulation, and Computation
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The past decade has seen remarkable success in nuclear science at the high‐energy frontier.
Breakthroughs in the identification and initial characterization of a new state of matter, the quark‐gluon
plasma (QGP) produced at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), have been a highlight of this
program. Today, there is a need for theoretical research that can elevate the investigation of nuclear
matter under extreme conditions to a new level of precision and fully use the RHIC and the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) experimental heavy ion capabilities. This project will advance the theory of jets in
nuclear collisions and employ these jets as powerful probes of the strongly interacting plasma. Our goal
is to develop new tools for precision in‐medium jet studies based on next‐to‐leading order perturbative
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) and Soft Collinear Effective Theory (SCET). We will identify
experimental observables that can differentiate between competing paradigms of particle production
and interaction in the QGP. The expected outcome of this project will be a significant reduction of the
current large uncertainty in the determination of plasma properties such as density, opacity, and
transport coefficients.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
55
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Regularized Finite Element Formulations for Shear Band Instabilities in Metals
Dr. Haim Waisman, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
This project aims for an improved understanding of material instabilities in the development of
advanced materials. A striking manifestation of instability in solids is the existence of shear bands, the
localization of shear strain into narrow bands during high‐speed deformation of metals such as those
that occur in impact or blasts. Shear bands are indicators of irreversible damage that eventually cause
fracture. New multiscale algorithms will be developed for enabling realistic, physics‐based predictive
models of materials fracture using high‐performance computers. By understanding the true mechanisms
that drive materials fracture, this research could aid in tackling important issues such as creation of
more durable “green" materials; geologic sequestration of contaminants such as carbon dioxide in the
fractured seabed; fracture of ice sheets in polar regions and their effect on global climate change; and
the design of infrastructure that is resilient to natural disasters and man‐made hazards.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
56
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Precision Measurement of Electron Antineutrino Disappearance in the Daya Bay Experiment
Dr. Lisa Whitehead, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204
Experimental observations have established that neutrinos undergo transitions from one type to
another as they travel. The Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment has recently observed the
disappearance of electron‐type antineutrinos from reactor cores at the Daya Bay Power Plant located in
China. This observation allowed Daya Bay to make a measurement of the neutrino mixing parameter θ ,
13
which was previously only known to be small in comparison to the other neutrino mixing parameters.
Daya Bay continues to take data and will improve upon this measurement in the near future. The Daya
Bay antineutrino detectors are located underground to shield them against cosmic ray muons, and a
veto system is used to detect cosmic muons that could produce background events. This program will
focus on the study of cosmic muon‐induced backgrounds at Daya Bay with a goal of achieving the lowest
possible level of background‐related systematic uncertainty on the disappearance measurement.
Additionally, data from the veto system will be used to make measurements of the muon flux and the
production of neutrons and radioactive nuclei by cosmic muons. These measurements will be of general
interest to other experiments that are sensitive to cosmic muon‐induced backgrounds such as
neutrinoless double β decay and dark matter searches.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
57
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Periodicity and the Role of the 5f‐Electrons at Protactinium
Dr. Richard Wilson, Assistant Chemist
Heavy Elements and Separations Sciences Group
Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division
Physical Sciences and Engineering Directorate
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
The assessment and development of viable alternative nuclear fuel cycles for nuclear energy
systems relies on our ability to rationally and deliberately control the molecular level chemical behavior
of these systems. The actinides (thorium, protactinium, uranium, plutonium) are major chemical
components of these complex systems. Controlling and predicting their chemistry can be accomplished
through a fundamental understanding of how these elements form molecular complexes or chemical
bonds. The difficulty in describing the chemistry of actinide bonding arises from our lack of knowledge
regarding the particular contributions to bond formation each of the actinide electronic orbitals makes
to the molecular bond. Differing contributions to molecular bonding from different electronic orbitals
vastly changes the structure, geometry, reactivity and stability of molecular complexes. In the actinide
elements the electronic orbitals of interest in bond formation are the f‐orbitals, the orbitals that define
them as actinides, and the d‐orbitals that drive the chemistry of the transition metals. The aim of this
research program is to investigate the contributions of the f and d orbitals to actinide bonding by
focusing on the second actinide element, protactinium. Protactinium is uniquely situated at the
electronic intersection of actinide‐f and transition metal‐d chemistries, its 5f and 6d orbitals are nearly
identical in energy. The small differences in the orbital energies at protactinium, in contrast to later
actinides such as plutonium, make it the ideal candidate to study and quantify how the differing orbital
interactions and contributions manifest themselves in the geometry, structure and reactivity of actinide
complexes. Invaluable insight for rational manipulation, modeling, and controlling the chemistry and
bonding across the entire actinide series will be obtained by coupling the results of this study of
protactinium's coordination chemistry, structural, and spectroscopic properties with the established
periodic trends in electronic structure and bonding in the early actinides and transition metals. The
knowledge and understanding derived from this study of the chemistry of protactinium bonding will
provide the basis upon which to unify our understanding of electronic and bonding interactions across
the entire periodic table.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
58
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Free Radical Reactions of Hydrocarbons at Aqueous Interfaces
Dr. Kevin Wilson, Staff Scientist and Division Deputy for Science
Chemical Dynamics Beamline
Chemical Sciences Division
Energy and Environmental Sciences
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Chemical reactions that occur at hydrocarbon/water and electrolyte interfaces govern a wide
array of environmentally and technologically important processes, including electrochemistry, aerosol
photo‐oxidation, cloud chemistry, corrosion, and heterogeneous catalysis. Hydrocarbon free radicals,
formed at these interfaces, play important roles in the chemistry as initiators or propagators of surface
reactions or as reactive intermediates. Two experimental techniques will be used in new ways to
examine the surface chemistry of hydrocarbon free radicals at gas/liquid interfaces. The atomic and
molecular changes at the surface of micron‐sized droplets will be measured by ambient pressure X‐ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. A surface sensitive mass spectrometer will be used to make kinetic
measurements of reaction rates and product distributions. The objective of this research is provide a
molecular description of the reaction pathways that lead to either bulk solvation of an organic molecule
or its removal from the interface through decomposition into gas phase products. These interfacial
processes are important for understanding and eventually predicting the environmental fate of
hydrocarbon byproducts of energy use and consumption.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
59
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
In Situ Scanning Force Microscopy Studies of Cross‐coupled Domains and Domain Walls
Dr. Weida Wu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08854
The objective of this project is to explore the nanoscale emergent phenomena and to
understand the unconventional properties of cross‐coupled domains and domain walls in multiferroics,
where both ferroelectricity and magnetism coexist. The giant magnetoelectric effect due to coupled
ferroic orders in multiferroics is of both fundamental and technological interest and is promising for
energy‐efficient multifunctional applications. The presence of domains and domain walls is a
distinguishing feature of any ferroic order; their responses to external stimuli determine the
macroscopic properties and the functionalities of ferroic materials. To address the challenges and to
directly visualize the cross‐coupled domains and domain walls and their responses to the applied electric
and magnetic fields, this project will develop a unique, high‐resolution and high‐sensitivity in situ
scanning force microscopy (SFM). The real space imaging of domains and domain walls by SFM aims to
fundamentally understand the nature of magnetoelectric cross‐coupling in representative multiferroic
and magnetoelectric materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
60
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Advanced Seeding, Beam Manipulation and Beam Diagnostic Techniques for Next Generation X‐ray
Free Electron Lasers
Dr. Dao Xiang, Staff Scientist
Beam and Free Electron Laser Physics Department
Accelerator Research Division
Accelerator Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA
X‐ray free electron lasers can provide tunable high‐power coherent radiation that enables
forefront sciences in various areas. This project aims to develop critical techniques that will greatly
enhance the capability of next‐generation X‐ray free electron lasers in delivering X‐ray pulses with
narrower bandwidth (close to Fourier transform limit) and shorter pulse width (less than 1 femtosecond,
or 10‐15 seconds). These ultra‐short, ultra‐narrowband X‐rays will allow four‐dimensional visualization of
molecular and atomic dynamics, offering new possibilities of studying ultra‐fast processes at the atomic
and molecular level. The research will focus on (1) studying advanced seeding and beam manipulation
techniques that promise generation of fully coherent X‐ray pulses at a wavelength of about 1 nm, (2)
pursuing advanced techniques to mitigate coherent synchrotron radiation and other collective effects
for generation of ultra‐short electron bunches, and (3) developing novel methods to measure ultra‐short
electron bunches. The outcome of this research should enhance the core capabilities of accelerator‐
based X‐ray light sources and potentially open up many new opportunities for X‐ray sciences.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
61
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Photon‐Electron Interactions in Dirac Quantum Materials
Dr. Xiaodong Xu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
The objective of this research is to understand and control electron, photon, and phonon
interactions in new classes of Dirac quantum materials such as graphene and topological insulators.
These materials have unusual physical properties that hold promise for novel energy harvesting
technologies. The proposed work will investigate the fundamental and technical aspects of these
materials using the combination of ultrafast optical spectroscopy and electrical transport
measurements. Spatially and temporally resolved photocurrent measurements will allow exploration of
the novel electronic response of these materials to optical excitation. This includes energy transport by
non‐equilibrium Dirac quasiparticles, carrier distribution and dynamics of topologically protected spins,
and spin and valley Hall effects. The resulting fundamental understanding may lead to new energy‐
efficient applications in high‐speed electronics, dissipation‐free spintronics, and photovoltaics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
62
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Computational Bayesian Framework for Quantification and Reduction of Predictive Uncertainty in
Groundwater Reactive Transport Modeling
Dr. Ming Ye, Associate Professor
Department of Scientific Computing
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 32306
Subsurface environmental systems, in which intricate biogeochemical processes interact across
multiple spatial and temporal scales, are open and complex. Understanding and predicting system
responses to natural forces and human activities is indispensable for environmental management and
protection. However, predictions of the subsurface system are inherently uncertain, and uncertainty is
one of the greatest obstacles in groundwater reactive transport modeling. The goals of this project are
to (1) develop new computational and mathematical methods for quantification of predictive
uncertainty and (2) use the developed methods as the basis to develop new methods of experimental
design and data collection for reduction of predictive uncertainty. The proposed computational Bayesian
framework is general and compatible with other widely used reactive transport models and numerical
codes, so the advances can be easily applied to gain insights into subsurface biogeochemical processes
that occur across a wide range of field sites and environmental conditions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
63
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Enhancing Metabolic Flux to Photosynthetic Biofuels
Dr. Jamey Young, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235
Developing liquid transportation fuels that are both renewable and compatible with existing fuel
infrastructure is a major research challenge of the next decade. Corn ethanol provides nearly all of the
renewable fuel currently used in the U.S. However, attention is shifting to "advanced" biofuels that
more closely resemble gasoline. Several recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of producing
advanced biofuels in engineered strains of photosynthetic cyanobacteria. These organisms could be
used to produce liquid fuels directly from sunlight and CO on land unsuitable for agriculture, thereby
2
minimizing energy‐intensive harvesting, transporting, and degrading of plant‐derived feedstocks.
However, cyanobacterial fuel productivity is currently too low for industrial feasibility. Therefore, this
project will test new metabolic engineering approaches for maximizing carbon flux from CO to biofuels
2
in cyanobacterial hosts. Tools will be developed for analyzing carbon flux and engineering the metabolic
pathways that result in biofuel production. This will be further optimized by reprogramming the
"biological clock" that controls daily metabolic rhythms that may affect those metabolic pathways. This
work will have an important positive impact on the development of bioprocesses that rely upon
photosynthetic microorganisms. In addition, it will provide fundamental insights into the role of
biological clock genes in regulating photosynthesis and carbon fixation in engineered cyanobacteria. This
research will directly contribute to DOE's mission by advancing toward production of renewable fuels
that do not compete with agriculture.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research and the
DOE Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
64
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Next‐Generation Optimization under Uncertainty: Structure‐Oriented Algorithms
Dr. Victor Zavala, Assistant Computational Mathematician
Laboratory for Advanced Numerical Simulations
Mathematics and Computer Science Division
Argonne National Laboratory
Argonne, IL 60439
With the advent of the smart grid, renewable technologies, and carbon emission programs, a
key concern is the coordination of national infrastructures such as the electricity, natural gas, and water
supply network systems. Anticipating and mitigating uncertainty of weather, demands, and
contingencies in a more integrated environment are necessary to maximize resource efficiency and
prevent cascading failures that can ultimately lead to catastrophic shortages of supplies. This project will
develop scalable high‐performance computing algorithms that will aid the design and real‐time dispatch
operations of national energy infrastructure systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
65
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Understanding Liquid Argon Neutrino Detectors: Moving from Art to Science
Dr. Geralyn (Sam) Zeller, Associate Scientist
Neutrino Department
Particle Physics Division
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL
One of the most surprising and important developments in particle physics in the last decade
has been the discovery that neutrinos can change from one type to another and hence must have mass.
A new generation of experiments are needed to investigate this phenomenon of neutrino oscillation and
its implications. To pursue this physics, large liquid argon (LAr) time projection chambers (TPCs) are
particularly intriguing detector options because they can image particle trajectories with stunning detail
and precision. One challenge posed by LAr TPCs is that few neutrino events have ever been fully
reconstructed in such devices, which makes it difficult to estimate their performance on complex
neutrino interactions. To quantify the capabilities of such detectors for neutrino physics, this research
will focus on the analysis of data collected in the exposure of modestly‐sized LAr TPCs to intense particle
beams at Fermilab. The goals are to build expertise with this very promising technology, to inform the
design of potential future long‐baseline neutrino detectors, and to provide an improved understanding
of nuclear effects that complicate low energy neutrino interactions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
66
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Search for New Physics and Upgrade of the Muon Spectrometer at ATLAS
Dr. Junjie Zhu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
The very successful operation of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in the first two years has
enabled physicists to venture far into unexplored territories of the Tera‐electron‐volts energy scale and
has provided unique opportunities to make fundamental discoveries in particle physics. This research
will focus on searching for new physics with vector gauge boson pairs or lepton pairs with the ATLAS (A
Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) experiment. These studies could provide insights to the source of electroweak
symmetry breaking or the existence of new dynamics and new force carriers. In order to maximize the
discovery potential at the energy frontier, this project also aims to improve the performance of the
ATLAS muon spectrometer by developing an upgrade strategy for the forward muon trigger system for
future high energy and high luminosity physics programs at the LHC.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
67
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2012
Growth and Properties of New Epitaxial Metal/Semiconductor Nanocomposites
Dr. Joshua Zide, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716
This project aims to provide a new synthesis capability to the thin film electronic materials
science community that allows for the incorporation of a variety of metal and semiconductor
nanoparticles into a semiconductor matrix for use in thermoelectrics, optoelectronics, and other
applications. The new method is a two‐step process: First, a gas condensation process is used to make
nanoparticles of desired material compositions with controlled morphology and size. Next, the
nanoparticles are incorporated into a semiconductor matrix by a melt process called liquid phase epitaxy
(LPE). This hybrid method offers more versatility in compositional variety and morphology than is
currently accessible through the standard Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) method and therefore
provides a greater variety of materials for discovery.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
68
