DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Biomimetic Templated Self‐Assembly of Light Harvesting Nanostructures
Dr. Alfredo Alexander‐Katz, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Inspired by the most efficient light‐harvesting antenna found in nature called the chlorosome,
this project will explore and understand from a theoretical perspective templated supramolecular self‐
assembly of natural and synthetic organic chromophores. Of particular interest is the self‐organization
of such organic dyes in block copolymer matrices. This system is meant to mimic elements present in
naturally occurring light‐harvesting nanostructures and transfer them to synthetic systems to identify
under what conditions it is possible to self‐assemble (or even perfect) such remarkable nanostructures.
Through development of theoretical models and by performing simulations over a wide range of
copolymer parameters and dye chemistries, a fundamental understanding of this system will be
achieved. Since block copolymers offer the opportunity to control supramolecular assembly morphology
and spatial localization, this knowledge could lead to new mesoscale materials that have enhanced
transport properties and potentially could direct the flow of energy. This has many potentially
transformative applications in which photon harvesting and energy conversion are key elements, such as
solar cells and thermoelectric materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
1
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Adsorbate Interactions in Catalytic Trend Studies
Dr. Thomas Bligaard, Senior Staff Scientist
SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis
Chemical Sciences Division
Photon Science Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
There is a constant drive toward more energy‐ and resource‐efficient technologies, for example
related to the use of natural gas or biomass, and new sustainable energy processes. A key element in
most novel energy technologies is the need for new, efficient catalysts made from Earth‐abundant
materials. The atomic‐scale design of catalytic materials with tailored properties represents a scientific
grand challenge. Computational catalyst search approaches leveraging electronic structure theory based
atomic‐scale simulations coupled with kinetic models constitute a promising avenue for future catalyst
discovery efforts. To reliably address detailed catalytic properties, such as product selectivity, the
simulation accuracy needs to be improved significantly. The absence of suitable models for reliably
including interactions between adsorbates presents a leading contribution to the inaccuracy in
computational catalysis trend studies. This project aims to improve the fundamental understanding of
the interactions between adsorbed atoms and molecular fragments on transition metal surfaces and
devise models to include these interactions in catalytic trend studies. The scientific insights and the set
of tools established in this project aim to create a break‐through in obtaining quantitative agreement
between theoretical catalysis studies and experimental measurements and could potentially become a
cornerstone in establishing an accurate and reliable “Catalyst Genome”.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
2
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Integrating Advanced Software and Statistical Methods for Spectroscopic Dark‐Energy Surveys
Dr. Adam S. Bolton, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
The physical nature of the dark energy (DE) that drives the present‐day accelerated expansion of
the universe is one of the most fundamental mysteries in science. All current experimental prospects for
understanding DE are found in observational cosmology, and rely on the measurement of cosmological
Doppler shifts ("redshifts") with telescopes and spectrographs. This research will develop and
implement next‐generation software algorithms and statistical methods for the optimal analysis of data
from spectroscopic DE experiments, integrating all levels from raw detector pixels to high‐level DE
science with: (1) calibration methods for determining and representing the relationship between
electromagnetic stimulus and detector response; (2) extraction methods for the lossless compression of
raw detector data into one‐dimensional spectra of galaxies and quasars; (3) classification and redshift‐
measurement methods based on hierarchical Bayesian statistics; and (4) DE parameter‐measurement
methods incorporating the full information content of the experimental data. This work will enable
spectroscopic DE surveys to maximize their efficiency and realize their full power in illuminating the dark
sector of the universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
3
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Energy‐Efficient Parallel Graph and Data Mining Algorithms
Dr. Aydın Buluç, Computational Research Scientist
Complex Systems Group
Computational Research Division
Computing Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Data are fundamental sources of insight for experimental and computational sciences. The
Department of Energy (DOE) acknowledges the challenges posed by fast‐growing scientific data sets and
more complex data. The graph abstraction provides a natural way to represent relationships among
complex fast‐growing scientific data sets. On future exascale systems, power consumption is of primary
concern yet existing graph algorithms consume too much energy per useful operation due to their high
communication costs, lack of locality, and inability to exploit hierarchy. This project explores methods to
increase the energy efficiency of parallel graph algorithms and data mining tasks. A new family of
algorithms will be developed to drastically reduce the energy footprint and running time of the graph
and sparse matrix computations that form the basis of various data mining techniques. This project will
also exploit the well‐known duality between graph and sparse matrices to develop communication‐
avoiding graph algorithms that consume significantly less power. This project is relevant to DOE mission‐
critical science including bioinformatics and genomics with particular emphasis on plant genomics that
can result in better biofuels through efficient genetic mapping, climate science where recent graph‐
based methods show increased accuracy in hurricane predictions, and combustion science where graph
search techniques are used to analyze extreme‐scale simulation data.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
4
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Develop On‐Demand Nanoplasmonic Device Concepts in a Semiconductor Compatible Hybrid System
Dr. Cheng Cen, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26506
The objective for this project is to develop an on‐demand nanoplasmonic platform that
combines emerging oxide nanoelectronics with a low‐loss semiconductor‐friendly plasmonic material ‒
graphene. In the heterostructures of graphene/LaAlO /SrTiO , the nanoscale conducting structures at
3 3
LaAlO /SrTiO interfaces reversibly patterned by conducting atomic force microscope (c‐AFM) will be
3 3
used to spatially modulate the chemical potential in the top graphene layer and provide dynamic
confinement and manipulations of plasmon modes in graphene. Various rewritable nanoplasmonic
devices, including waveguides, active modulators, on chip light source and sensors, will be explored by
c‐AFM lithography and in‐situ near field scanning optical microscopy. The successful development of
such hybrid plasmonic platform will enable creation of on demand nanoplasmonic devices in one single
step and can potentially lead to tantalizing applications in single molecule spectroscopy, scalable solid
state quantum information processing and novel plasmon probes for various interesting material quanta
in condensed matter physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
5
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Exploring Fundamental Physics through New Measurements of the Cosmic Microwave Background
Polarization
Dr. Clarence L. Chang, Assistant Scientist
Astrophysics and Cosmology Group
High Energy Physics Division
Physical Sciences and Engineering Directorate
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439
The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) is the relic radiation from 400,000 years after the Big
Bang. The CMB is an image of the early universe and a unique window into fundamental physics. The
goal of this research program is to measure a faint signal embedded in the polarization pattern of the
CMB. This signal, called “B‐modes,” has never been seen and will explore two scientific topics. The first
topic is the nature of inflation, the theorized rapid exponential expansion of the early universe, taking
place between 10‐36 and 10‐32 seconds after the Big Bang. CMB “B‐modes” are the unique probe of this
physics. Interestingly, the physics of inflation connects directly to our understanding of physics at high
energies. Inflation is expected to take place at energies of about 1016 GeV, the same energy scale
favored by Grand Unified Theories of Particle Physics. The second scientific goal of this program is to use
CMB “B‐modes” to measure the mass of the neutrinos. It is well understood that neutrinos are massive,
however, the value of the neutrino mass is currently unknown. This award will support a program
pursuing these science objectives through two research activities. The first activity is analyzing data from
the South Pole Telescope polarization (SPT‐Pol) experiment, a recently deployed CMB polarimeter on
the South Pole Telescope. SPT‐Pol uses a focal plane comprised of custom designed and fabricated
detectors using superconducting technology. With this focal plane, SPT‐Pol will be able to make the first
observations of CMB “B‐modes.” The second activity is the development of new superconducting
detector technology for next generation CMB experiments. This technology would enable the
construction of future CMB instruments that will be 10‐100 times more powerful than the current state‐
of‐the‐art South Pole Telescope‐Polarization (SPT‐Pol)
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
6
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
The Higgs Frontier
Dr. Clifford W. Cheung, Assistant Professor of Theoretical Physics
Department of Physics
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
The recent discovery of a new particle consistent with the Higgs boson completes the table of
the fundamental particles predicted in the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. The aim of this
research is to determine the implications of present and future Higgs measurements for fundamental
physics at the energy, intensity, and cosmic frontiers. At the Energy Frontier, modified Higgs properties
are a smoking gun for new weak scale particles. The proposed work will establish a systematic mapping
between observed Higgs properties and simplified models of new physics. In turn, these effective
theories will be used to hone targeted searches for new weak scale particles, and address fundamental
questions about vacuum stability and grand unification. At the Intensity Frontier, numerous hidden
sector models couple to the SM through the Higgs boson or closely related particles. The proposed work
will explore the ramifications of Higgs properties for hidden sectors and their phenomenology at high
intensity probes like B‐factories, fixed target experiments, and neutrino observatories. At the Cosmic
Frontier, the Higgs boson critically affects direct detection constraints for many models of weakly
interacting massive particle (WIMP) dark matter (DM). Intriguingly, these theories presently lie at the
experimental tipping point between observation and exclusion. The proposed work will utilize simplified
models of DM to help exclude the majority of thermal relic WIMP DM theories within the next
generation of direct detection experiments. This work will also study the cross‐correlations between DM
direct detection and Large Hadron Collider (LHC) limits, and the implications of Higgs measurements for
early universe cosmology. Key elements of this research proposal employ a simplified model framework,
defined here to be the SM augmented by the handful of new particles relevant to a given observation.
From a purely theoretical perspective, simplified models are advantageous because they eliminate
extraneous states and parameters which typically accompany ultraviolet completions; experimentally,
they are observationally inclusive, and have been actively adopted by experimentalists at the LHC in a
variety of direct searches for new physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
7
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Experiments and Simulations of Hypervelocity Impact Plasmas
Dr. Sigrid Close, Assistant Professor
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94305
Hypervelocity particles, including meteoroids and space debris with masses smaller than 1
microgram, routinely impact spacecraft. Upon impact, a particle vaporizes and ionizes itself and part of
the spacecraft surface, producing a dense plasma that expands and radiates electromagnetic energy.
However, the behavior of the resulting plasma and its potential to produce a spacecraft anomaly
remains unknown. This research effort will investigate plasmas generated by hypervelocity impacts in
order to characterize the behavior of the expanding plasma and its interactions with the ambient
environment. The project will include experimental campaigns to be conducted at a dust accelerator
facility that can accelerate particles up to 60 km/s, which is representative of meteoroid speeds, and at a
light gas gun facility that can accelerate larger projectiles up to 7 km/s, which is representative of orbital
debris. The experiments will use plasma, optical and radio frequency sensors to characterize the
dynamics and associated emission resulting from hypervelocity impact plasmas. This project will also
combine the collected data with results from numerical simulations using particle‐in‐cell (PIC) and
smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) techniques. The results from both experimental measurements
and simulations will provide a new understanding of the mechanism for the onset of instabilities and
turbulence that can lead to radio frequency emission by these plasmas.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
8
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Extreme Expression of Cellulases in Poplar
Dr. Heather D. Coleman, Assistant Professor
Department of Biology
Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
Cellulose, the major component of plant cell walls, is composed of long chains of sugars linked
together. Plant cellulosic biomass (stalks, trunks, stems, and leaves) provide a vast, untapped source of
sugars that can be fermented to produce biofuels. Sugars are extracted from biomass using enzymes
(cellulases) that break down cellulose. However, a major roadblock to developing an economically viable
cellulosic biofuel production process is the cost of those enzymes, typically produced and purified using
bacteria or fungi. An alternative and potentially more economic approach is to produce the enzymes
within the plant itself. The goal of this research is to implement a new genetic engineering technology to
produce large amounts of exogenous cellulases into poplar cells. This technology allows the researcher
to control the production of the enzymes within the plant using an inducer substance that triggers the
rapid accumulation of the cellulases. The transformation of poplar trees using this approach will
increase the efficiency of converting cellulose to fermentable sugars and will increase our understanding
of plant cell walls. Furthermore, the cellulases produced by these transformed trees could be purified in
a cost‐effective way, paving the way for developing a sustainable alternative for the production of
biofuels from woody feedstocks.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
9
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
First Principles Predictions of Phase Stability in Complex Oxides
Dr. Valentino R. Cooper, Research and Development Staff Member
Advanced Materials Group
Materials Sciences and Technology Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The goal of this project is to use first principles methods to predict materials with enhanced
properties that can be synthesized and remain active under device relevant conditions. Theory and
computation have become an integral part of the materials discovery process. Theory and computation
have become an integral part of the materials discovery process. Electronic structure methods, for
example, excel at the prediction of macroscopic properties in materials that have yet to be grown.
Unfortunately, predictions of synthesizability and operability are less straightforward. Temperature,
pressure and the stability of competing phases are amongst the litany of factors that determine whether
a material can be made or will exhibit favorable properties under the required operating conditions. This
project aims to develop and implement robust, high‐throughput computational approaches for
exploring phase stability to facilitate the prediction‐to‐synthesis process. Addressing this challenge will
require strong synergy between (i) electronic structure calculations for properties predictions, (ii)
phenomenological/empirical models for examining phase stability as related to competing secondary
structures and temperature‐ and pressure‐dependent transitions and (iii) experimental validation. The
abundance of possible cation chemical identities and arrangements makes complex perovskite oxides an
ideal playground for these studies, especially since this variability gives rise to both a wide array of
physical, chemical, electrical and magnetic properties as well as to possible competing structures. In this
vein, this project is focused on the identification of solid solutions of complex oxides with enhanced
piezoelectric properties. These materials are fundamentally important in many modern technologies
such as high‐resolution ultrasound machines and fuel injectors in clean burning and efficient diesel
engines. It is anticipated that more responsive, lead‐free materials may enable new and exciting
technologies. Equally important is the fact that the framework implemented in this project will be
applicable to a wide range of materials; thus having a broader impact for accelerating the design and
experimental realization of novel materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
10
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Fast, Dynamic, and Scalable Algorithms for Large‐Scale Constrained Optimization
Dr. Frank E. Curtis, Assistant Professor
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
Scientists and engineers are constantly faced with the task to optimize an objective subject to
physical, environmental, or resource constraints. The technique of using mathematical models to
formulate and find real solutions of such problems is known as mathematical optimization, a process
that has become invaluable for design and discovery in numerous scientific fields. This project will
involve the development and implementation of high‐performance computing algorithms for solving
cutting‐edge optimization problems. These include problems that involve (1) data uncertainties, such as
those in the future supply, demand, and capacity of a given power system, (2) extreme numbers of
alternatives, such as in the design of electrical power grids to avoid network vulnerabilities, and (3) real‐
time decisions, such as in the control of chemical reactors. The key features of these new algorithms are
that they will be fast, dynamic, and scalable to meet the computational requirements of scientists and
researchers working to optimize large‐scale, complex systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
11
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Multiple Coupled Potential Energy Surfaces with Application to Combustion
Dr. Richard Dawes, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Missouri University of Science and Technology
Rolla, MO 65409
Hydrocarbon combustion involves the dynamics of numerous small radicals such as HO , HCO,
2
and HOCO. Dynamical calculations for these relatively simple systems are very sensitive to the detailed
topography of their global potential energy surfaces (PESs). The objective of this research is to develop
general strategies for robustly convergent electronic structure theory for global multichannel reactive
surfaces, particularly for molecular systems important to combustion. Combining advances in ab initio
methods with automated interpolative PES fitting allows the construction of high‐quality PESs
incorporating thousands of high level data to be done rapidly through parallel processing on high‐
performance computing (HPC) clusters. This project will benefit the combustion community by
facilitating rapid and routine development of global PESs and subsequent dynamics studies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
12
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
From Quarks to the Cosmos: Ab Initio Studies in Nuclear Physics
Dr. William Detmold, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The Standard Model provides the basis for our understanding of the world at the smallest
scales. A central part of the Standard Model is Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), which describes the
strong interactions between quarks and gluons, interactions that bind them together into protons and
neutrons and, ultimately, into nuclei. A central goal of nuclear physics is to understand the mechanisms
and consequences of these interactions. Because of their complexity, the equations describing QCD can
so far only be solved numerically using supercomputers. This research will expand the regimes in which
these numerical methods can be applied, enabling Standard Model investigations of central questions in
nuclear physics. In particular, the spectrum, structure and decays of light nuclei and hyper‐nuclei (exotic
cousins of nuclei that contain so‐called strange quarks) will be computed, providing important
comparisons for contemporary experiments at Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility and other
laboratories around the world. In addition, the research will investigate the two‐body and three‐body
interactions between protons, neutrons and hyperons (particles similar to the proton but containing
strange quarks) that play crucial roles in the dense interiors of supernovae and neutron stars.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
13
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Neutrinoless Double‐Beta Decay Searches and Other Fundamental Physics Measurements with Ultra‐
Low Background Enriched‐Germanium Detectors
Dr. Jason A. Detwiler, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
The goal of this research is to search for neutrinoless double‐beta decay, weakly‐interacting
massive particle dark matter, solar axions, and other rare processes using germanium detectors.
Detection of any of these physics particles and processes would have vast implications for our
understanding of nature; from our description of the fundamental particles and their interactions, to
hints toward grand unification of the forces of nature, to the potential resolution of the unexplained
excess of matter over antimatter in the observable universe. Central to this effort will be research on
the Majorana Demonstrator project, which is under construction at the Sanford Underground Research
Facility in Lead, South Dakota. This project will support participation in the construction and
commissioning of the enriched germanium detector modules, in detector operations and data taking,
and coordination of the data analysis effort. A detector research and development laboratory will also
be set up at the University of Washington to make auxiliary measurements to further constrain potential
backgrounds in the Majorana Demonstrator experiment, and to prototype and evaluate detector
upgrades that will enable future, more sensitive experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
14
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Edge Pedestal Structure Control for Maximum Core Fusion Performance
Dr. Ahmed Diallo, Staff Research Physicist
National Spherical Torus Experiment Upgrade
Plasma Science and Technology Department
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
Princeton, NJ 08543
The anticipated performance of future fusion reactors such as ITER and a Fusion Nuclear Science
Facility (FNSF) will rely on controlling the edge of the plasma. The edge plasma region is especially
important since the plasma temperature rises very rapidly over a short distance in this region, and high
plasma temperature is essential to maximizing fusion power. If the edge is not controlled properly,
edge‐localized instabilities can rapidly transport heat from the core and deposit large bursts of energy
onto plasma‐facing components. These energy bursts can damage the components, and the component
materials can pollute the plasma and reduce the fusion power. The edge region of the plasma where the
temperature changes most rapidly is typically a few centimeters wide and is referred to as the pedestal.
This research project is aimed at understanding the physical mechanisms governing the pedestal during
its formation, and subsequently, at demonstrating how to control the pedestal on National Spherical
Torus Experiment‐Upgrade (NSTX‐U) at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. To achieve this goal,
the project is divided into two major phases. First, this research will establish how the edge is formed
and evolves before destabilizing the plasma by analyzing the evolution of pedestal density and
temperature profiles. Once the evolution of the pedestal is understood, the second phase will consist of
controlling it through the use of a combination of stimulated particle expulsion and external fueling
actuators (e.g., granule injectors or radio frequency waves) to increase or reduce the density of the
pedestal. When the appropriate level of expulsion and/or fueling is determined, it will be integrated
onto NSTX‐U for optimum plasma operation as part of the final phase. The successful demonstration of
this edge control is paramount to achieve maximum fusion power and efficiency and will provide the
knowledge base for extending advanced edge control techniques to next‐step fusion devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
15
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
The Nature of the Spin Dependent Surface Chemical Bond: Spin‐Polarized STM Studies of Metal‐
Organic Interfaces
Dr. Daniel B. Dougherty, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
This project applies spin polarized scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy to
characterize interactions between organic molecular materials and magnetic surfaces. Using this novel
and spin‐resolved technique allows single molecule imaging resolution to be combined with magnetic
sensitivity. By simultaneously mapping the spin‐polarized density of electronic states and adsorption
geometry of organic molecules on magnetic surfaces, the project aims to observe the magnetic impacts
of metal‐organic interfacial interactions. These interactions can imprint magnetic properties on
otherwise non‐magnetic molecules or can be used to modify intrinsic molecular magnetism. Goals of the
project include understanding how magnetic interactions at metal‐molecule interfaces are determined
by molecular geometry, binding location on the surface, and molecular magnetism. This information
could help the optimization of interfaces in organic spintronic devices that may be used for information
storage and computing applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
16
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Solution‐Based Adaptivity as a Paradigm for Computational Fluid Dynamics
Dr. Krzysztof J. Fidkowski, Assistant Professor
Department of Aerospace Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Computational simulations of physical phenomena inherently introduce numerical errors due to
space and time discretization. Successful predictive science and engineering requires both robust
control of this numerical error and an adaptive method that ensures the appropriate amount of
resolution for efficient calculations. This project addresses both of these aspects through innovations in
error estimation and discretization adaptation. New techniques will be developed to efficiently estimate
error and to ensure resolution of important areas of a computational domain, without wasting
resources on features that do not affect accuracy. These methods will bring together recent advances in
numerous computational areas, including high‐order accurate finite elements, a‐posteriori error
estimation, model reduction, and approximation space optimization. While adaptive methods apply to
many different computational simulations, the project will stay grounded with a practical Department of
Energy application, thermal hydraulics. In this application, access to inexpensive high‐fidelity adaptive
computations will yield more reliable analysis, improved designs, and accurate uncertainty propagation.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
17
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Atomically Defined Edge‐Doping of Graphene Nanoribbons for Mesoscale Electronics
Dr. Felix R. Fischer, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
The outstanding transformative potential of graphene, an infinite two‐dimensional sheet of
carbon atoms tightly packed into a honeycomb lattice, has been recognized mostly due to its
exceptionally high electric conductivity, thermal conductivity, and tensile strength. These undeniably
very desirable properties, however, represent only a very small facet of the true potential of all‐carbon
based materials and its promise to revolutionize the field of molecular electronics. Graphene's most
unusual characteristics emerge when the infinite macroscopic sheet is scaled down to nanometer
dimensions. The exploration, realization, and implementation of its truly exotic electronic and magnetic
properties rely on the development of innovative synthetic strategies that provide atomically precise
control over the self‐assembly of mesoscale objects. The central objective of this research is to develop
the crucial chemical tools required to synthesize and to fine‐tune the physical properties of graphene
nanoribbons (GNRs) with atomic precision. The innovative techniques and the expanded knowledge will
be used to rationally tailor desired physical properties and function into nanometer‐scale molecular
electronic devices; e.g. transistors as logic gates in computing, data storage media based on electrically
gated spin valves, or molecular amplifiers, all fabricated from readily available molecular building blocks
into atomically defined GNRs.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
18
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
The Origin of Heavy Elements: Connecting Laboratory Nuclear Astrophysics with Astronomical
Observations through Nucleosynthesis Modeling
Dr. Carla Fröhlich, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
One of the fundamental questions about our origin and the origin of the cosmos around us is
where and how the chemical elements are made. Supernovae, the violent deaths of stars, play an
important role in this: Almost all of the elements are created in stars and dispersed in supernova
explosions. Our theoretical understanding of supernova explosions and of the creation of heavy
elements is still incomplete. However, nuclear experiments and astronomical observations provide a
multifaceted set of constraints. The goals of this project are to advance the simulations of
nucleosynthesis in astrophysical explosions and to use them to connect current and future experimental
efforts in nuclear physics with astronomical observations. The focus of this project is on modeling
nucleosynthesis in core‐collapse supernovae and similar astrophysical environments. General aims of
this project include refining the conditions in supernovae and the associated nucleosynthesis of heavy
and rare isotopes, providing the means to test theoretical predictions and experimental results in
nuclear physics against data from optical and X‐ray telescopes, and preparing for future experimental
efforts in nuclear physics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
19
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Predictive Theory of Topological States of Matter
Dr. Liang Fu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Topological states of matter are novel quantum phases that exhibit universal and quantized
properties arising from topological properties of many‐body quantum wavefunctions. In recent years,
predictive theory has played a leading role in the discovery of topological states in a variety of quantum
materials. The goal of this research is to develop the theory for new topological states of matter in
crystalline solids and predict/propose their material realizations. This research will determine novel
quantum properties of topological materials, shed new light on the competition between electron
localization and itinerancy in solids, and enable potential applications in tunable quantum electronics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
20
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Probing Chromophore Energetics and Couplings for Singlet Fission in Solar Cell Applications
Dr. Etienne Garand, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Wisconsin‐Madision
Madison, WI 53715
The goal of this project is to provide a molecular‐level understanding of paths for improving
alternative sources of energy, including an improved efficiency of dye‐sensitized solar cells. Here, the
mechanisms and molecular requirements for efficient exciton multiplication through singlet fission are
explored using high‐resolution anion photoelectron spectroscopy to probe clusters and covalently‐
bonded dimers of organic chromophores. The experiments are capable of observing directly the singlet,
triplet, and charge transfer states involved in singlet fission and determining precisely their energetics,
vibrational structures and couplings. More specific aims are (1) to probe the evolution of the electronic
structure as a function of cluster size in order to understand singlet fission in crystals, (2) to explore the
relationship between the nature of linkers and the electronic structure in covalently‐bonded
chromophore dimers, and (3) to highlight the differences, including exciton delocalization and the
effects of solvent interactions, between the crystalline species and the isolated covalently‐bonded
dimers.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
21
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Simulation of Correlated Lattice and Impurity Systems Out of Equilibrium
Dr. Emanuel Gull, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Correlated quantum systems out of equilibrium exhibit a wealth of intriguing and unexpected
quantum phenomena. Theoretical understanding of these phenomena lags far behind current
experimental capabilities, as standard analytic approaches routinely fail and a solution of the quantum
mechanical equations of motion precise enough to describe correlation physics is not available. In this
project, unbiased and numerically exact methods for numerically simulating correlated quantum
impurity and lattice models out of equilibrium will be developed based on continuous‐time quantum
Monte Carlo algorithms. These methods will be used to systematically study the physics of correlated
quantum systems in non‐equilibrium situations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
22
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Design Synthesis and Characterization of Triptycene‐Containing Macromolecules with Hierarchically
Controlled Architectures as Functional Membrane Materials for Energy Applications
Dr. Ruilan Guo, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
Rising energy demands, limited supplies and an increasing awareness of environmental factors
make innovative energy technologies that explore renewable, clean energy resources or enable
environmentally sustainable and efficient ways to use fossil fuels highly desirable. In many cases, the
critical component has been efficient chemical separation, such as gas separations in carbon capture
and selective ion transport in fuel cells and osmotic power applications. Membrane technology, which
takes advantage of materials selectivity rather than energy to perform separations, is a promising
approach because of its low energy consumption, environmental friendliness, modularity, and reliability.
This project addresses the growing need for revolutionary macromolecular membrane materials
applicable for a broad range of critical membrane mediated technologies. The objective of this research
is to design and develop a new platform of high performance functional polymeric membranes with
hierarchically controlled architectures derived from three‐dimensional, shape persistent triptycene
molecular units. These polymers possess rich structural hierarchy and versatile chemistry that enables
the polymers to organize into unique spatial arrangements using novel chain threading and interlocking
self‐assembly concepts. Accomplishment of the planned research would enable the identification of the
critical structural and topological variables over multiple length scales needed for fast and selective
molecular separation and transport. The separations to be addressed have the potential to be of
enormous significance in the U.S. quest to more efficiently exploit fossil fuel resources and to address
the grand challenges in carbon capture.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
23
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
State‐of‐the‐Art Microscopic Computations of Weak Processes in Nuclei
Dr. Gaute Hagen, Research and Development Staff Member
Nuclear Physics Theory Group
Physics Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Electroweak processes such as beta decay in atomic nuclei address fundamental questions such
as: “What are the mechanisms for the production of elements heavier than iron? What is the nature of
the neutrino? What is the electroweak charge distribution in nuclei?” Beta decay rates are crucial input
for nucleosynthesis simulations that aim at determining the origin of elements, and also for
understanding the nature of the neutrino (“Is the neutrino its own anti‐particle?”). The aim of the
planned research is to address these questions by state‐of‐the‐art microscopic computations of weak
nuclear decays with quantified uncertainties. By developing novel extensions of the coupled‐cluster
method, this research will make predictions of properties of medium‐mass, neutron‐rich nuclei at a
microscopic level. The planned research will be relevant for the future experiments aimed at measuring
the weak charge distribution in Calcium‐48 at Jefferson Lab, neutrinoless double‐beta decay
experiments with the Majorana Demonstrator, and beta decay lifetimes for astrophysically relevant
exotic nuclei such as Nickel‐78 and Tin‐132 studied at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB). These
advanced calculations, based on two‐ and three‐nucleon interactions, will shed new light on the
microscopic mechanisms behind weak decays such as neutrinoless double‐beta decay, and will help
constrain nuclear forces.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
24
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
The Multiconfiguration Time‐dependent Hartree Fock (MCTDHF) Method for Interactions of Molecules
with Strong Ultrafast High‐Energy Laser Pulses
Dr. Daniel J. Haxton, Staff Scientist
Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Theory Group
Chemical Sciences Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Recent advances in laser technology have enabled an entirely new class of experiments
involving ultrafast laser pulses. These pulses can be used to excite, probe, and ultimately control atoms
and molecules on the time scale of electronic motion. Theoretical modeling is crucial for designing such
experiments and explaining the results. However, it is difficult to calculate what happens to a molecule
exposed to intense, short laser pulses and there are no established methods to do so, even with a
supercomputer. Recently the Multiconfiguration Time‐Dependent Hartree‐Fock (MCTDHF) method has
been shown to be viable for this purpose. The goals of this research problem are to further develop and
apply the MCTDHF method to small systems (atoms and diatomic molecules) that are under
investigation in current experiments. Additional capabilities will be implemented to apply the method to
studies of the light‐induced dynamics of larger, polyatomic molecules.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
25
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Neutron Scattering Instrumentation Research and Development for High Spatial and Temporal
Resolution Imaging at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Dr. Jason P. Hayward, Assistant Professor
Department of Nuclear Engineering
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
This project will exploit recent advances in optoelectronics to develop new concepts for position
sensitive area detectors with orders of magnitude higher spatial and temporal resolution and to apply
this new capability to map Li distribution in an operating Li‐air cell. Success in this research will be
transformational to neutron imaging, a powerful tool to investigate materials for such applications as
fuel cells, energy storage, hydrogen storage and nuclear technology. The higher time resolution of the
detectors will make it possible to efficiently carry out Bragg edge (or energy selective) imaging at high
intensity pulsed sources like the Spallation Neutron Source. The processes, knowledge and algorithms
developed will allow for spatially (1 micron) and time resolved (100 ns) high throughput neutron
transmission imaging in large areas at reasonable costs in the near term. In addition to neutron imaging
these detectors will greatly benefit single crystal Laue diffraction for macromolecular research.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
26
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
High Performance Toolkit for Photon Science
Dr. Alexander Hexemer, Staff Scientist
Experimental Systems Group
Advanced Light Source
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Light sources are Basic Energy Science facilities that serve thousands of researchers per year.
These facilities are currently generating scientific data faster than can be analyzed using the
computational methods of the past, so that scientific discovery is limited by the inability to rapidly
analyze large data sets. The high performance toolkit will accelerate the rate of scientific discovery by
enhancing the rate at which data can be analyzed. The main focus will be to develop and expand tools
for analyzing large volumes of light source data. All tools in the toolkit will be optimized for
parallelization on multiple central processing units (CPU), graphical processor units (GPU), and hybrid
CPU/GPU multicore architectures. This will decrease analysis times by several orders of magnitude while
simultaneously permitting larger data sets to be processed. An easy‐to‐use graphical user interface will
be developed for the toolkit that can be easily accessed by a broad scientific audience.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
27
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
High Precision Event Simulation for the LHC
Dr. Stefan Hoeche, Associate Staff Scientist
Theoretical Physics Department
Elementary Particle Physics Division
Particle Physics and Astrophysics Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94205
Particle physics has entered a new era with the discovery of an elementary boson at the
European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) Large Hadron Collider (LHC). To determine the properties
of the new particle and to search for signatures of physics beyond the Standard Model (SM) it is crucial
to obtain reliable predictions for both signal and background reactions. Monte‐Carlo event generators
produce such predictions fully differentially at the level of observed particles. They rely on various
models to cope with the many‐body dynamics of the problem and with the non‐abelian, nonlinear
nature of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the quantum‐field theoretical model of the strong nuclear
force. Dependence on the model parameters is one of the main uncertainties affecting measurements
and searches at the LHC. Whenever possible such dependence must be reduced or eliminated. Strong
interactions are omnipresent at the LHC, leading to the production of collimated sprays of hadrons,
called jets, which enter the particle detectors. The simulation of jet dynamics in general purpose event
generators is based on perturbation theory, with calculations carried out as an expansion in the strong
coupling constant, α. In order to produce hadron level events suitable for passing through a detector
s
simulation, certain terms in the expansion must be summed to all orders, which is achieved using parton
shower algorithms. Parton showers are universal, but only approximate the exact higher‐order
perturbative QCD result for any given reaction, thus giving rise to large uncertainties. A major step
forward in reducing these uncertainties will be achieved in this project by combining parton showers
with exact next‐to‐next‐to‐leading order perturbative QCD calculations. Furthermore, the precision of
the parton shower itself will be increased by including the full color dependence of splitting operators in
the soft gluon limit. These developments will greatly enhance the discovery potential of the LHC.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
28
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Quest for a Top Quark Partner and Upgrade of the Pixel Detector Readout Chain at the CMS
Dr. Andrew G. Ivanov, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS 66506
With the recent discovery of a new particle consistent with the Higgs boson, high energy physics
has reached an important milestone. The Higgs boson completes the table of the fundamental particles
predicted in the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. Nonetheless, the partner of the top quark is
the most anticipated candidate to be discovered next, where its existence is required in any “natural”
extension of the model. The research focuses on expanding the current studies at the Compact Muon
Solenoid (CMS) Experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Center for Nuclear
Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland on searches for top partners that have not yet been fully
explored at CMS. In order to maintain a large potential for new physics discovery, the project also aims
to improve the performance of the CMS Pixel Detector system by upgrading the data acquisition
readout chain needed for future high energy and high luminosity physics runs at the LHC.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
29
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
New Data on Neutron Reactions Relevant to Basic and Applied Science
Dr. Marian Jandel, Staff Scientist
Nuclear and Radiochemistry Group
Chemistry Division
Chemistry, Life, and Earth Sciences Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
Precise experimental data on nuclear reactions are essential for an improved understanding of a
wide range of basic and applied problems in nuclear physics, including nucleosynthesis, weak interaction
physics, dark matter detection, nuclear reactor operation, nuclear forensics, nuclear nonproliferation,
and stockpile stewardship. In this project, new experimental methods and data analysis techniques will
be developed to enable the determination of high‐precision capture and neutron‐induced fission cross
sections, through detailed measurements of capture gamma rays and prompt fission gamma rays. These
experiments will be performed at the Detector for Advanced Neutron Capture Experiments (DANCE)
facility at the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE), which can measure these cross sections
over almost seven orders of magnitude of incident neutron energy. New correlated data from these
measurements will provide insights into the physics of the electromagnetic decays of nuclei, nuclear
fission, and properties of excited nuclei. In addition, challenging measurements of neutron‐induced
reactions on short‐lived nuclei will be carried out at DANCE and at the Lead Slowing‐Down Spectrometer
(LSDS), once suitable radioactive targets become available.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
30
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Mechanical Performance of HTS Superconductors for HEP Applications
Dr. Matthew C. Jewell, Assistant Professor
Materials Science Center
University of Wisconsin‐Eau Claire
Eau Claire, WI 54702
Recent advances in the current‐carrying capacity of high temperature superconductors (HTS)
have focused the superconducting community on two primary materials of choice, Bi Sr CaCu O
2 2 2 8+x
(known as Bi‐2212 or a type of bismuth strontium calcium copper oxide) and rare earth (Re) based
coated conductors, ReBa Cu O (known as ReBCO or rare‐earth barium copper oxide). HTS
2 3 7‐x
development projects funded by the Department of Energy in recent years have not only led to
significant improvements in the critical current density (Jc) of these conductors, but, particularly in the
case of Bi‐2212, have elucidated several key mechanisms blocking the current flow and provided
optimism that further Jc improvements are achievable. However, the mechanical parameter space in
which each conductor can operate has received significantly less attention. The objective of this work is
to define the mechanical operating envelope of current Bi‐2212 and ReBCO conductor designs, specify
the microstructural origins of degradation in each conductor type, and provide feedback to the ongoing
critical current enhancement efforts underway for each conductor type to ensure that the conductors
developed are mechanically robust in addition to having high critical current performance. These efforts
will also provide magnet builders with maximum flexibility in selecting a coil‐winding route without
being limited by present technical challenges such as delamination of the ReBCO conductor during
thermal cool‐down.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
31
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Emergence of High Tc Superconductivity Out of Charge and Spin Ordered Phases
Dr. Eun‐Ah Kim, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
How to understand and control high Tc superconductivity (HTSC) is among the most
fundamental and pressing challenges in modern condensed matter physics. Recent experiments have
revealed striking universality among copper‐based and iron‐based HTSC: the superconductivity emerges
out of phases in which electron’s charge and spin are spontaneously organized in orderly patterns
bearing lower symmetry than the symmetry of the host lattice. However, little is known about how
these orderly patterns form and what role they play in HTSC. The mechanism and the role of the
observed charge and spin patterns in HTSC is the key objective of this research. In this project a “middle‐
up/down approach” is taken, applying theoretical perspectives directly to the analysis of experimental
data and using the results as input to microscopic models to be studied using various analytical and
computational methods. This approach enables theoretical guidance and supports cutting edge
experimental efforts. The outcome, elucidating how HTSC emerges from charge/spin ordered phases,
will provide insight into the mechanism of HTSC. More broadly, it will offer insights into how endless
possibilities emerge in correlated systems and how we could control them.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
32
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Concrete Ingredients for Flexible Programming Abstractions on Exascale Systems
Dr. Sriram Krishnamoorthy, Staff Scientist
High Performance Computing Group
Computational Sciences and Mathematics Division
Fundamental and Computational Sciences Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99352
Exascale systems are expected to have a very dynamic execution environment due to
architectural heterogeneity, variable data access latencies, system noise, and fault management.
Difficulties in programming such systems have led to a renewed interest in abstractions for finer‐grained
concurrency. This project will develop algorithms that target finer‐grained concurrency, irregular data
structures, and flexible data movement and synchronization semantics. The effectiveness of the
algorithms designed will depend on the specific system architecture and status of the execution
environment at a particular point in time. To this end, the project will identify and characterize the key
performance characteristics of the algorithms developed.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
33
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Compiler and Run‐Time Approaches to Enable Large Scale Irregular Programs
Dr. Milind Kulkarni, Assistant Professor
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
Irregular algorithms, which feature unpredictable accesses to data structures, are becoming
increasingly common in high performance computing. The defining characteristics of irregular
applications, their dynamic, unpredictable, data‐dependent access patterns and data layouts, make
achieving high performance on large scale systems difficult. This project will develop techniques that can
address the communication, locality and scalability challenges that emerge as irregular applications are
deployed on exascale systems. The research work will deliver a system that can (a) transform irregular
applications to improve their locality and computational intensity, while reducing communication needs;
and (b) perform run‐time scheduling and tuning to optimize the application for a specific system. This
system will allow programmers to easily deploy irregular applications that scale to exascale platforms
without the need of hand‐optimizing and hand‐tuning their codes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
34
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Microscopy of Electrostatic Field Effect in Novel Quantum Materials
Dr. Keji Lai, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
The objective of this research is to explore the nanoscale electronic properties when charge
carriers are electrostatically modulated in advanced quantum materials, such as complex oxides, layered
chalcogenides, and organic semiconductors. By combining electrolytic gating, a method that produces
an unprecedented electric field effect, with scanning microwave impedance microscopy that probes
sub‐surface phenomena, this project aims to establish a new kind of useful imaging methodology as well
as to answer many pressing questions in technologically important materials. Specifically, the research
will (1) spatially resolve electronic phase transitions induced by density modulation; (2) compare the
underlying physics between bulk chemical doping and surface electrostatic doping; and (3) investigate
the microscopic origin of sub‐threshold behaviors in novel field‐effect transistors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
35
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Developing Synthetic Biology Tools to Engineer Plant Root System and Improve Biomass Yield and
Carbon Sequestration
Dr. Dominique Loque, Biological Engineer, Staff Scientist,
and Director of the Cell Wall Engineering Group
Joint BioEnergy Institute
Physical Biosciences Division
Biosciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA
Dedicated crops for bioenergy production must be grown in marginal environments to avoid
competition with food crops that are cultivated in high‐quality arable land. However, nutrient and water
availability is very low in these marginal environments. Therefore, energy crops must be engineered to
improve their ability to extract those vital elements from poor soils so they can reach their full yield
potential without the cost and environmental impact of chemical fertilization. The root system not only
anchors a plant to the ground but is responsible for acquiring essential mineral nutrients and water and
for maintaining interactions with the soil environment, all critical for plant growth. In spite of their
importance for biomass accumulation, plant roots are relatively understudied and few engineering tools
area available to better understand and improve root function. This project will address this need by
developing “universal” root expression tools that are functional across a broad range of plant species.
These tools will be used to engineer metabolic pathways that will be designed to optimize nutrient
acquisition by energy crops such as switchgrass and Camelina. This research will deliver a diversity of
building blocks for plant root engineering that will be instrumental in advancing DOE goals for
sustainable production of bioenergy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
36
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Resolving Reactor Antineutrino Anomaly with Strong Antineutrino Source
Dr. Jelena Maricic, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Hawaii
Honolulu, HI 96822
An intriguing, nearly three‐sigma indication of the electron antineutrino disappearance at less
than 100 m distance from the nuclear reactor core has recently been revealed. The effect was named a
reactor antineutrino anomaly (RAA). The disappearance may be due to reactor neutrinos oscillating into
another neutrino type. However, oscillation into either muon or tau neutrinos cannot happen at any
detectable level in less than 100 m. Therefore, electron antineutrinos may be oscillating into a new, yet
undiscovered, fourth neutrino type that is ’sterile’, does not interact with ordinary matter, thus cannot
be observed directly. All analyzed data combined, point to the oscillation length of less than 10 m
between electron antineutrinos and sterile neutrinos. The objective of this research is to test the sterile
neutrino oscillation hypothesis in a complimentary way: deploy a massive 76000 curie electron
antineutrino source (cerium‐144 and praseodymium‐144) in the veto region of a giant, 1 kiloton
antineutrino detector called Kamioka Liquid Scintillator Antineutrino Detector (KamLAND). The project is
called CeLAND. It will search for the sterile neutrino oscillation in 3‐16 m range and probe the majority
of the oscillation phase space suggested by the RAA with 95% confidence level. Demonstrating the
existence of fourth particle generation, sterile neutrinos would be one of the most dramatic discoveries
of physics beyond the Standard Model. The resolution of RAA will in any case provide a valuable cross‐
check of the validity of the reactor antineutrino flux calculations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
37
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2013
Electron Microscopy with Vortex Beams Carrying Orbital Angular Momentum
Dr. Benjamin J. McMorran, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Materials Science Institute
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
The goal of this project is to develop new electron microscopy capabilities using electron vortex
beams. Electron microscopy is one of the most widely used tools for studying energy‐related materials
at atomic length scales, yet the information that it can typically provide is limited by the types of
physical interactions occurring between the electron beam and the sample. Electron vortex beams can
interact with matter in new ways compared to conventional electron beams because they possess
unique orbital, magnetic, and wave properties. This project investigates methods for using the electron
vortex beam to directly probe magnetization and electronic orbital structure within materials. Methods
will also be explored for using these beams to enhance image contrast of carbon‐based materials at the
nanoscale. To accomplish these goals, the project will advance a new technique of using nanofabricated
electron optical structures to produce electron vortex beams inside existing microscopes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
38
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Room Temperature Electrochemical Upgrading of Methane to Oxygenate Fuels
Dr. William E. Mustain, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical, Materials and Biomolecular Engineering
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
With recent discoveries of vast amounts of shale methane deposits in Pennsylvania and the
Dakotas, and the introduction of renewable biogas to the market, the availability of methane in the
United States is at an all‐time high. High petroleum prices and an increased emphasis on domestic
energy security will make methane‐to‐fuels (MTF) processes even more important in the near‐future
than they are today. Current MTF processes are initiated through the steam reforming of methane to
syngas (CO + H ), followed by catalytic re‐reduction of CO by H to hydrocarbon and oxygenate fuels.
2 2
Unfortunately, the large heat requirements and high temperatures (900‐1100oC) of steam reforming
makes the process expensive, the reaction selectivity poor, and the implementation complicated with
complex heat integration schemes, costly gas separations, and limited available materials that can
withstand severe stress. In addition, the steam reforming process produces a significant amount of CO .
2
The objectives of this research are to understand the underlying mechanisms for the direct
electrochemical conversion of methane to syngas at room temperature, and develop new
electrocatalysts that convert methane to methanol at room temperature (T < 40oC) with high selectivity
(> 90%) to overcome the limitations of existing MTF processes. Methanol was selected as the target
molecule because it can be used directly as an energy source and it is the primary precursor for the
manufacture of many commodity chemicals, making it one of the most produced and important
industrial chemicals in the world. This project will have far reaching applications by providing a new
pathway for the electrochemical synthesis of complex oxygenates and long‐chain hydrocarbons through
the formation of new C‐O and C‐C bonds.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
2
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Methane Oxidation in the Rhizosphere of Wetland Plants
Dr. Rebecca B. Neumann, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
Methane is a potent greenhouse gas, with a global warming potential 20‐times larger than that
of carbon dioxide. The objective of this project is to improve predictions of future methane emissions.
The project will examine the conversion of methane to carbon dioxide, i.e., methane oxidation, within
the soil zone surrounding roots (the rhizosphere) of wetland plants. Wetlands are the largest natural
source of methane to the atmosphere, and a majority of methane emitted by wetlands travels from soil
through plants to the atmosphere. Plants also support the movement of atmospheric oxygen into the
soil where it can oxidize methane; up to 90% of the methane produced in wetlands can be converted to
carbon dioxide in this way. However, the process is not well captured by most computer models where
oxidation of methane is simply set to a constant percentage. In reality, the percentage of methane
oxidized in the rhizosphere is dynamic, responding to soil and water chemistry and to plant traits and
behavior. As the climate changes, plant species composition, plant behavior, and subsurface chemistry
will change, altering the fraction of methane oxidized within wetlands. Thus, understanding the
dynamic response of methane oxidation to these expected climate‐induced changes is key to accurately
predicting future methane emissions. This project will study the potential for future changes in methane
oxidation using a combination of field measurements, laboratory experiments and modeling
investigations informed by field and laboratory results. Outcomes include a quantitative and predictive
understanding of the interaction between plant behavior and methane oxidation in wetlands, an
improved representation of methane oxidation in computer models, and an enhanced appreciation of
how changes to the climate system will impact methane emissions from wetlands. These outcomes
address one of the scientific drivers for the Biological and Environmental Research program at DOE:
“discovering the physical, chemical, and biological drivers and environmental impacts of climate
change.”
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
2
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Engineering Anaerobic Gut Fungi for Lignocellulose Breakdown
Dr. Michelle A. O'Malley, Assistant Professor
Chemical Engineering Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Renewable biofuels derived from plant biomass (stems, stocks, and leaves, mainly composed of
cellulose and lignin) are attractive alternatives to petroleum‐based fuels. To produce biofuels, enzymes
are used to break down cellulose into simple sugars, which are then fermented into fuels such as
ethanol and butanol. However, because the structure of cellulose is a tightly bound network of
crystalline cellulosic fibers and lignin, existing biomass degrading enzymes are not very efficient. New
technologies to break down plant material into sugar can be developed by studying how microbes digest
lignocellulose in biomass‐rich environments, such as the digestive tract of large herbivores. Anaerobic
fungi that live in the absence of oxygen and are native to the gut and rumen of these animals, have
evolved powerful enzymes to degrade plant biomass. This project will develop new experimental tools
to engineer anaerobic fungi for lignocellulose breakdown and biofuel production. To accomplish this
goal, a panel of anaerobic fungi will be isolated from different herbivores and screened for their ability
to degrade several types of lignin‐rich grasses and agricultural waste. Focusing on a model anaerobic
fungus, the basic metabolic processes that control enzyme production will be determined. This
information will be used to develop new genetic engineering strategies to manipulate gut fungi at the
molecular level. Understanding the biology of these anaerobic organisms will result in the development
novel platforms for biofuel production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
3
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Neutrino Physics with SNO+
Dr. Gabriel D. Orebi Gann, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
Neutrinos are unique in the Standard Model of particle physics, with masses many orders of
magnitude below any other known fundamental particle. The reason for this is not yet understood, but
could shed light on critical questions such as the absence of antimatter in our matter‐dominated
Universe. Perhaps the most fundamental question in neutrino physics lies in the very nature of the
neutrino: the neutrino is the only known fermion with the potential to be its own antiparticle. Sudbury
Neutrino Observatory or SNO+ is a neutrino experiment with a broad physics program, the primary goal
being a search for the phenomenon of neutrinoless double beta decay, a process possible only if the
neutrino is indeed its own antiparticle. Such a discovery would re‐write our understanding of particle
physics, including introducing the need for a new mechanism for generating particle mass, and also
place limits on the as‐yet‐unknown neutrino mass. SNO+ will also detect neutrinos from diverse sources
such as the Sun, nearby supernovae, and from within the Earth itself. This proposal requests support for
a targeted plan of optical calibrations of the SNO+ detector. A well‐understood, stable source of light
will be developed using the “Cherenkov effect”, with the goal of measuring and monitoring the
efficiency of SNO+ light sensors independently of the other optical properties of the detector. The work
to be done under this award will provide SNO+ with a precise model for the detector response, allowing
an enhancement in the accuracy of predictions for real data, thus improving the sensitivity of the
experiment. Also supported is the implementation of these calibrations in physics analyses, involvement
in all levels of analysis activities, and leadership in SNO+ science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
4
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Search for the Higgs and Physics Beyond the Standard Model with the CMS Electromagnetic
Calorimeter
Dr. Toyoko Jennifer Orimoto, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
Understanding the origins of electroweak symmetry breaking and probing the possibilities of
new physics at the Energy Frontier is one of the primary goals of high energy physics. The recent Higgs
boson discovery by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiments at the European Center for Nuclear
Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland signal a new era in particle physics and brings us closer to
achieving these goals. The most critical next steps in the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) Experiment’s
physics program include the characterization of this new particle by studying whether it exhibits the
expected properties of a Standard Model (SM) Higgs boson, whether additional Higgs particles exist, or
if any deviations from the model indicate the presence of new physics. The project further aims to
maximize these studies by improving the data acquisition and performance of the CMS Electromagnetic
Calorimeter system to enhance the high energy resolution needed for observing the Higgs boson.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
5
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Non‐Centrosymmetric Topological Superconductivity
Dr. Johnpierre Paglione, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
Topological insulators are a newly discovered class of materials with strong potential for impact
in both fundamental science and future technologies. Differing from conventional insulators by the
presence of a robust metallic surface state, these materials offer possible new avenues for technologies
such as spintronics and quantum computation. Coupling these states with the perfect conductivity
found in a superconductor has the potential to not only help elucidate new physics, but also to establish
the groundwork for new technologies that combine the unique features of each state of matter. This
program is focused on the synthesis, characterization, and optimization of a new family of materials
with promise of being both topological insulators and superconductors simultaneously, allowing for
investigations of the interplay between these two states of matter in the same material system.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
6
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 65 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated July 3, 2013
A Multiscale Reduced‐Order Method for Integrated Earth System Modeling
Dr. George Shu Heng Pau, Research Scientist
Hydrogeology Department
Earth Sciences Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Earth system models are increasingly used as predictive tools for decision support and policy
making to mitigate the effects of climate change. Considerable effort has been invested to improve the
accuracy of these models by incorporating physical processes with vastly different spatial and temporal
scales, leading to multiscale earth system models. For example, small‐scale cloud‐resolving models are
embedded in coarse‐scale climate atmospheric models to improve the modeling of precipitation.
However, these embedded multiscale models are typically very slow to calculate and evaluate, even
with the use of supercomputers. This project will build a new kind of climate model, a so‐called
“reduced‐order” model, made up of statistical approximations or “surrogates” for multi‐scale processes
that can be solved much more quickly than a full climate model. The reduced‐order model will be
constructed numerically using a combination of techniques from applied mathematics and computer
science. New linking or “coupling” approaches that exploit the computational efficiency of reduced‐
order models will be developed to bridge component and sub‐component models of different scales.
This project will also efficiently estimate the uncertainties and errors of the reduced‐order model,
enabling objective quantification and adaptive improvement of the model fidelity. The efficiency gains
from using a reduced‐order model will enable rigorous characterization of uncertainties in the predicted
outcomes and improve confidence in the predictive capabilities of Earth system models. The example or
test case chosen for this project is a “surrogate” Arctic permafrost model that will approximate the full‐
blown land model under development for the DoE sponsored Next Generation Ecosystem Experiment
(NGEE).
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
2
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 65 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated July 3, 2013
Application of Next‐Generation Sequencing to Engineering mRNA Turnover in Cyanobacteria
Dr. Brian F. Pfleger, Assistant Professor
Chemical and Biological Engineering Department
University of Wisconsin‐Madision
Madison, WI 53715
The ability to control gene expression in microorganisms is essential for biotechnology
applications such as renewable fuel production and carbon dioxide fixation. To carry out their function,
genes coded in the DNA must be transcribed into a messenger RNA (mRNA), which is translated into a
protein with biological activity. While the processes of transcription and translation are well understood
in many organisms, much less is known about the stability of the mRNA and how its life span affects
gene expression. Thus, genetic engineering tools used to express foreign genes in microbes rarely
consider key factors that influence mRNA stability. The goal of this project is to fill this gap in knowledge
for a model photosynthetic bacterium, a cyanobacterium. Using the latest DNA sequencing
technologies, this research will identify mRNA sequence features that affect the rate of mRNA turnover.
Those features will be used to design strategies for altering mRNA stability and to improve oil
production in cyanobacteria. The planned experiments will leverage the DOE Joint Genome Institute
DNA and RNA sequencing capabilities and will contribute data for the computational infrastructure
provided by the DOE Knowledgebase. The knowledge gained from this project will help the development
of more accurate gene expression models and will facilitate metabolic engineering projects needed to
advance toward the sustainable production of biofuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
3
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 65 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated July 3, 2013
Energy Transport in High‐Energy‐Density Matter
Dr. Yuan Ping, Staff Scientist
High Energy Density (HED) Section
Physics Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
This project aims to provide high‐quality data on critical energy transport properties of high‐
energy‐density (HED) matter. Transport processes, such as thermal and electrical conduction, radiation,
viscosity, electron‐ion equilibration and particle stopping, determine the mechanisms and rates of
energy transfer and redistribution within HED matter. These energy partition pathways must be
properly diagnosed and understood in order to develop and benchmark next‐generation advanced
models for extreme HED conditions such as those found in Inertial Confinement Fusion (ICF). Energy
transport not only affects capsule performance in ICF central hot‐spot ignition, but also is important in
advanced ICF schemes including fast ignition and shock ignition. At present, very little data exist in the
relevant regimes because these extreme conditions are difficult to create and to measure. A suite of
recently developed novel x‐ray and optical techniques can now enable the challenging measurements, in
particular, on thermal conductivity, electrical conductivity and viscosity. The data will also impact many
other fields where HED science plays a crucial role, such as studies of geophysical phenomena, planetary
formation, and astrophysical objects.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
4
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 65 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated July 3, 2013
Examination of Actinide Chemistry at Solid‐Water Interfaces to Support Advanced Actinide
Separations
Dr. Brian A. Powell, Assistant Professor
Department of Environmental Engineering and Earth Sciences
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
The study of the chemical and physical properties of actinide bonding and reactivity is essential
for the development of an improved nuclear fuel cycle and to understand how the actinides move
through the environment. This work will examine the fundamental chemical properties of actinide
elements in aqueous solutions and at solid‐water interfaces. Sorption of actinides to solid surfaces such
as minerals and soils can limit the movement of actinides in the environment and sorption to
engineered solids can facilitate separation of actinides from other waste materials within the nuclear
fuel cycle. Understanding and quantifying actinide bonding and reactivity at solid‐water interfaces is
needed for a wide range of applications such as advanced actinide separation schemes, waste treatment
and disposal, understanding actinide behavior under geologic repository conditions, and determining
the performance of actinide bearing wastes and waste facilities. A novel aspect of this work will be to
examine sorption processes on a mechanistic basis and quantify the data using a standard
thermochemical construct as opposed to the empirical methods commonly employed. The overarching
objectives of this work are to provide a mechanistic conceptual model and a quantitative sorption model
describing actinide behavior at solid‐water interfaces based on a molecular level understanding of the
chemical processes involved. Particular attention will be focused on understanding underlying
mechanisms of actinide sorption to differing solid phases, understanding underlying mechanisms behind
frequent observations of hysteretic sorption and understanding the potential formation of ternary
actinide‐ligand‐surface complexes. The ability to predict distribution of the actinides between aqueous
and solid phases in the presence of various organic ligands represents a step towards the development
of unique, organic solvent free separation systems based on solid‐liquid partitioning and will also
improve models of actinide behavior in natural systems containing naturally occurring organic ligands.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
5
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 65 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated July 3, 2013
Neutron Scattering Investigation of the Relationship between Molecular Structure, Morphology and
Dynamics in Conjugated Polymers
Dr. Danilo C. Pozzo, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
The overarching goal of this project is to develop structure‐property relationships for conjugated
polymers, an important new class of materials used in applications such as organic solar cells,
thermoelectric energy conversion, flexible displays incorporating organic light emitting diodes,
conductive and electrochromic coatings, supercapacitors and chemical sensors. These polymers offer
several advantages including simplified processing from solution, the use of abundant raw materials,
flexible form‐factors and a capacity to fine‐tune semiconductor energy levels. Unfortunately,
unmodified conjugated polymers are generally insoluble and hence difficult to process. To overcome
this problem, the polymers are chemically modified by attaching chemical side‐groups to their
backbones to boost solubility in processing solvents without significantly affecting their properties.
However, these steps can impact the ultimate performance of the polymers. Currently, predictive
knowledge is lacking on how the specific molecular structure of the side‐groups affects polymer self‐
assembly and charge propagation in nanostructured phases or in the solid‐state. To address this gap,
neutron scattering experiments (elastic and quasi‐elastic) will be employed to probe the nanostructure
and the system dynamics along with simultaneous (in‐situ) dielectric spectroscopy and rheology to
understand and develop structure‐property relationships. Experiments will be complemented by
molecular simulations to gain predictive knowledge on the relationship of chain structure,
microstructure, and time‐dependent relaxation processes with the macroscopic properties of the
materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
6
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 65 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated July 3, 2013
Computational Design of Graphene‐Supported Nanocatalysts
Dr. Ashwin Ramasubramaniam, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
The goal of this project is to develop a systematic computational approach for the rational
design and evaluation of nanoscale transition‐metal catalysts supported on graphene, a two‐
dimensional sheet of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice. The use of graphene supports, as
compared to carbon nanotubes or carbon black, has been experimentally shown to enhance significantly
the catalytic activity of metal nanoclusters in fuel cell electrodes. However, there is not yet a clear
mechanistic understanding of the role played by graphene supports in improving catalyst performance.
This project will develop and implement computational models to understand and predict electronic
interactions between transition‐metal nanoclusters and graphene supports, taking into account
complexities that arise in practice from statistical variations in cluster size and morphology, quantum
size effects at the nanoscale, and the presence of physical and chemical defects in graphene. Model
transition metal and graphene catalyst systems will be employed for statistical sampling of selected
reactions pathways to probe the influence of substrate–cluster interactions on reaction
thermodynamics and kinetics. The fundamental understanding gained from these studies could guide
the rational design of superior, graphene‐supported, transition‐metal nanocatalysts with potential
applications in energy conversion pathways for alternative fuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
7
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Mid‐rapidity Di‐lepton Measurements at RHIC with the Muon Telescope Detector at STAR
Dr. Lijuan Ruan, Physicist
STAR Group
Physics Department
Nuclear and Particle Physics Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
An important task in today’s relativistic heavy ion physics is to study the fundamental properties
of the Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP), including the temperature, density profile, and color screening. Data
taken over the last decade have demonstrated that the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) has created
the QGP, a hot, dense medium with partonic degrees of freedom. However, the initial temperature of
the QGP is not well constrained by previous experimental results and estimates dependent on models
have large uncertainties. The planned study will measure the decay of different quarkonium states into
two muons. These bound states of two heavy quarks are predicted to melt before decaying at very
different temperatures in the QGP. The dissociation of the states depends on the color screening length
of the QGP and quarkonium binding energies, that is, how strongly the different colored quarks are
screened from each other in the QGP. In addition, measurements of muon‐electron correlations from
heavy flavor decay will help remove the dominant background for an alternative method of determining
the QGP temperature based on the measurement of thermal radiation. With these new techniques, the
planned measurements will provide direct information on the temperature and the characteristics of
the color screening in the QGP created at RHIC.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
8
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Hadronic Parity Violation in Few‐Nucleon Systems
Dr. Matthias R. Schindler, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of South Carolina
Columbia, SC 29208
The objective of this research is the detailed and model‐independent analysis and interpretation
of the parity‐violating component of the interactions between nucleons. Resulting from the interplay of
weak and strong interactions between quarks, the constituents of the nucleons, parity violation in
nucleon interactions offers a unique probe of the forces and mechanisms that bind the quarks into
nucleons. Despite several decades of experimental and theoretical efforts, hadronic parity violation is
still poorly understood. Recent progress on high‐intensity neutron sources, for example at the Spallation
Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, makes it possible to study parity violation in few‐
nucleon systems. This project will apply modern theoretical techniques to find a consistent description
of parity‐violating interactions in a collection of different experiments, and will also establish
connections to lattice gauge theory and parity violation in more complex systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
9
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Dynamics of Emergent Crystallinity in Photonic Quantum Materials
Dr. Jonathan Simon, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
Photons make fantastic information carriers because they pass through one another nearly
unimpeded. For this same reason, a material composed solely of photons is virtually unheard of: unlike
atoms, photons simply do not collide enough to order spontaneously. This work aims to synthesize and
study the very first “optical material” by indirectly engineering collisions between photons through the
real scattering of photons off of highly excited atoms. The fabric of these exotic materials is predicted to
froth with quantum foam churned up by a many‐body Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Stirring this
foam and watching it swirl and settle will provide insight into the properties of a forthcoming generation
of engineered materials whose bizarre properties arise due to quantum mechanics. In particular, the
work will have immediate implications for quantum computing and quantum communication, as well as
the structure, heat capacity, and conductivity of low dimensional electronic systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
10
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Decoupling the Electronic and Geometric Parameters of Metal Nanocatalysts
Dr. Sara E. Skrabalak, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
Central to many industrial processes (e.g., petroleum refining) and the realization of new energy
platforms (e.g., fuel cells and biomass conversion) is heterogeneous catalysis. The performance of a
catalyst is governed by interplay between electronic and geometric factors, but controlling these
parameters to achieve efficient catalysis remains a grand challenge. The central objective of this
research is to decouple the electronic and geometric parameters of nanoscale metal catalysts for
independent manipulation through the design and use of new architecturally‐controlled bimetallic
nanocrystals. The binary composition of the structures will provide a means of electronic control while
the shape of the nanocrystals will provide geometric control. Independent selection of these features in
new architecturally‐controlled nanostructures will allow the electronic and geometric parameters of
metal nanocatalysts to be effectively decoupled for independent manipulation. Initial experiments are
directed toward new nanocatalysts for formic acid electroxidation, but it is anticipated that novel
architecturally‐controlled bimetallic nanocrystals will be designed, synthesized, and applied to other
chemical transformations requiring advances in catalysis. Validation of new catalysts designs can bring
unprecedented efficiency to many chemical processes and conserve both natural resources and
economic capital which are requisite for a sustainable future.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
11
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Nanostructured Colloidal Self‐Assembly and Controlled Alignment of Anisotropic Nanoparticles
Dr. Ivan I. Smalyukh, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309
Harvesting, storage, and conversion of energy among its different forms strongly depend on
available materials and their properties. Self‐assembly of nano‐sized functional units is an exceptionally
promising way of designing inexpensive artificial composite materials with new macroscopic physical
behavior and properties. The main objective of this project is to explore self‐organization of anisotropic
nanoparticles into colloidal composites with tunable ordered structures. The research will focus on
understanding and control of self‐assembly of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles, as well as on
material behavior arising from their ordered self‐organization and alignment. Fundamental studies of
shape‐dependent colloidal interactions and ordering of quantum dots and plasmonic metal
nanoparticles will reveal underpinning physical mechanisms that guide mesoscale morphology and
ultimately determine material properties of the self‐assembled composites. These properties will be
characterized and correlated with hierarchical structures and composition. Analytical and numerical
modeling of colloidal interactions and material properties will provide important insights at different
stages of this project. This research may enable new, cheaper, and more efficient renewable energy
technologies, a new breed of energy‐efficient information displays and consumer devices, as well as a
fertile ground for new basic science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
12
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Transition Metal Oxides Spinel Nanomaterials for Supercapacitor Reactions
Dr. Xiaowei Teng, Assistant Professor
Chemical Engineering Department
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
The principal means for storing energy generated off‐peak for later on‐peak usage currently
leave a void between overall storage capability and power delivery. Supercapacitors as a class of energy
storage devices are able to fill the energy and power gap between batteries and electrostatic capacitors.
The proposed work is to investigate the charge‐storage mechanisms of transition metal oxides (TMOs)
for use in supercapacitors. This project will focus on the fundamental structure‐property relationship of
faceted spinel TMO nanoparticles, including simple spinel (e.g., Co O and Mn O ) and binary spinel
3 4 3 4
(e.g., Co Mn O and Fe Mn O ). The hypotheses to be investigated are (1) nanosized TMOs will
1‐x 2‐x 4 1‐x 2‐x 4
have high specific surface area for ionic conductance; (2) faceted spinel nanoparticles with higher
percentages of reactive and/or stable surfaces will facilitate the fast charge‐transfer reaction and long
cycle life. Through the interplay between novel material syntheses, structural and functional
characterizations, and synchrotron‐, neutron‐based in situ measurements, the ultimate goal of the
proposed research is to provide fundamental understanding of electrode materials for supercapacitors
that can store more energy while maintaining a stable electrode/electrolyte interface. The outcome of
the proposed research will support directly the nation’s effort to diversify its energy supply portfolio,
and help to reduce the global carbon footprint.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
13
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Residue Specific Characterization of Electrostatics, Conformational Heterogeneity, and Dynamics of
Electron Transfer Proteins with Linear and Nonlinear Infrared Spectroscopy
Dr. Megan C. Thielges, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
The goal of this project is to further the understanding of photosynthetic electron transfer by
studying proteins and their motion with high spatial and temporal detail. Biological electron transfer
occurs between sites embedded within the proteins from which water is excluded, creating an
environment that is very different from that found in normal bulk liquids. Further, the electron transfer
reactions are very fast – typically occurring within tiny fractions of a second – and thus involve short‐
lived binding interactions between the donor and acceptor. These factors, combined with the structural
complexity inherent to such large macromolecules, make the experimental study of these systems very
challenging. This project will adapt, combine and develop new spectroscopic approaches to measure the
motions of molecules after labeling specific parts of the proteins, which will enable a deeper
understanding of the local sites where electron transfer occurs. The insights provided by this research
will deepen the understanding of electron transfer in photosynthesis and should greatly aid efforts to
create artificial systems for solar energy capture and storage.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
14
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Imaging Interfacial Electric Fields on Ultrafast Timescales
Dr. William A. Tisdale, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The objective of this research is to explore a novel methodology for visualization of ultrafast
electronic processes at interfaces. The method, which is based on optical stimulation, builds upon
previous success using spontaneous surface nonlinear optical probes to track the temporal evolution of
interfacial electric fields resulting from charge separation across an interface. A goal is to speed signal
acquisition by up to seven orders of magnitude so that laser scanning ultrafast microscopy becomes
feasible. The ultimate aim is to generate movies of interfacial electronic phenomena occurring on
femtosecond timescales and submicron length scales, thereby informing our understanding of disorder,
heterogeneity, and morphology, and how these factors affect ensemble behavior in photovoltaic,
electrochemical, and optoelectronic systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
15
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Exploring the Fundamental Origin of Cosmic Acceleration
Dr. Andrew J. Tolley, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, OH 44106
The central goal of the proposed research program is devoted to exploring a compelling set of
descriptions for the fundamental physics responsible for the dynamics of cosmic acceleration, both in
the late and early universe. In particular, it shall capitalize on the significant recent progress in the
development of two new classes of infrared modified theories of gravity: Massive Gravity and related
Galileon theories. The general aims of this program will: (1) determine if Massive Gravity models are
viable alternatives to the standard cosmological paradigm for the dark sector ‐ a cosmological constant
and cold dark matter; (2) explore their predictions for gravitational tests via post‐Newtonian corrections
and gravitational radiation; (3) understand the nature of black hole thermodynamics and holography in
the models; and (4) develop a consistent picture and numerical procedure for quantum corrections. In
parallel, this research program will explore the implications of analogous dynamical models that rely of
nonlinearly realized symmetries for early‐time cosmic acceleration, with a particular focus on the
influence of fluctuations of heavy fields, the breaking of global symmetries from gravity, and their
predictions for primordial non‐ Gaussianities. The potential observations of the latter in current probes
of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) would provide an exceptional window into fundamental
physics, and the initial conditions of the universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
16
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Beyond the Black Box: Combining System and Model Dynamics to Learn About Climate Uncertainties
Dr. Nathan M. Urban, Energy Security Fellow
Computational Physics and Methods Group
Computer, Computational, and Statistical Sciences Division
Theory, Simulation, and Computation Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
Changes in climate due to greenhouse gases and other warming or cooling agents have large
uncertainties because internal changes to the climate system, known as “climate feedbacks,” are poorly
known. Climate feedbacks can amplify or suppress greenhouse warming, for example by melting snow
to expose dark soil that absorbs more sunlight, thereby accelerating warming. Climate models include
these feedbacks, but the formulations and magnitudes of the feedbacks differ among models. This
project will address this challenge, developing a new approach for climate projection using a statistical
method to quantify the uncertainty in individual climate system feedbacks, such as changes to snow, ice,
or clouds. It will combine information contained in a multi‐model ensemble of numerical climate
simulations with the observational climate record. The statistical method centers on the development of
a simple and flexible statistical‐physical climate model, whose behavior can be adjusted to reproduce
the feedbacks and other dynamics seen in complex physical simulations and observational data. This
method will permit a wider and much more rapid exploration of possible Earth system behaviors than
seen in individual climate models. It will improve upon existing "black box" statistical methods that
average together model predictions without knowledge of the physical dynamics underlying different
components of the Earth system. The new statistical method will be applied to improve the probabilistic
prediction of trends, spatial patterns, and variability in the future climate by more fully exploiting
information about climate dynamics contained in both physical theory and data. Once developed, an
exploratory study will be conducted to discern the rate at which particular continued observations of
the Earth system may be expected to reduce our uncertainty about the future climate. The method may
also be used to quantify the respective roles of human impacts and natural climate variability, and as a
predictive decision support tool for integrated climate‐economic‐impacts modeling and assessment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
17
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Plasmon‐Mediated Electrochemical Reactions: The Influence of Nanoparticle Structure
Dr. Katherine A. Willets, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
Noble metal nanoparticles interact with light through the excitation of plasmons, which are
light‐driven collective oscillations of the conduction electrons at the nanoparticle surface. This project
will use noble metal nanoparticles as electrodes for electrochemical reactions to determine whether
excitation of plasmons in these electrodes can affect the redox potentials and rate of electron transfer
of molecules on the nanoparticle surface. Surface‐enhanced Raman scattering and fluorescence will be
used as optical readouts for the redox state of the molecule, with a change in the optical signal
occurring as the molecule transitions between the oxidized and reduced forms. The role of nanoparticle
structure will be investigated at both the single particle length scale (10‐100 nanometers) and at the
single molecule length scale (1‐10 nanometers) in order to determine how different nanoparticle shapes
and nanoscale features impact the redox potentials and electron transfer rates of the molecules on the
surface. This project will generate insight into how light can be used to lower energy barriers in
electrochemical reactions, making them more energetically favorable.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
18
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Gluonic Excitations in Mesons
Dr. Michael Williams, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
At the most profound level, the principal goal of research in physics is to learn about the
fundamental laws that govern our universe. Two ways to accomplish this are searching for new
phenomena and performing stringent tests of accepted theories. The Gluonic Excitation Experiment
(GlueX) experiment, currently being built at Jefferson Lab in Newport News, VA, will do both. In the
standard model of particle physics, interactions between quarks and gluons are described by the theory
of quantum chromodynamics (QCD). While the equations of QCD have been known for decades,
solutions to these equations have yet to be found at energy scales that are relevant for describing
protons, neutrons and nuclei. In recent years, much progress has been made towards obtaining
numerical solutions to QCD using supercomputers and a technique called lattice QCD. Recent lattice
QCD calculations predict the existence of states of matter with quantum numbers that have not yet
been observed in nature. GlueX will confirm or deny the existence of these states, thereby providing a
quantitative test of the theory of QCD. This project will contribute to enhancing the performance of the
GlueX detector and to analyzing the data that it collects. Work will be done to allow the experiment to
collect data at higher rates. Advanced analysis techniques will be developed and applied to the data
collected by GlueX. The work funded by this proposal will greatly increase the potential for GlueX to
advance our understanding of interactions between quarks and gluons.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
19
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Generation of Tunable Fully Coherent Stable Terawatt‐Level Hard X‐ray Free Electron Laser Pulses
with Femtosecond Duration
Dr. Juhao Wu, Staff Scientist
Free Electron Laser and Beam Physics Department
Accelerator Research Division
Accelerator Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Terawatt (TW) peak power x‐ray pulses from a Free Electron Laser (FEL) will make it possible to
image single molecules and study structures at the subnanometer scale. This project will study the
feasibility of generating such pulses from a hard x‐ray FEL. The pulses would have more than 1013
photons in a pulse with a 10 femtoseconds duration and a very narrow bandwidth, much narrower than
can be produced by an unseeded FEL. Such pulses will have more than an order of magnitude higher
peak power than can be currently provided by existing hard x‐ray FEL facilities like the Linac Coherent
Light Source (LCLS). These high power FEL pulses will be generated with a seeded photon beam passing
through a highly tapered undulator. The seed must be predominantly coherent with stable intensity and
a large signal‐to‐noise ratio for efficient response. A technique called improved Self‐Amplified
Spontaneous Emission (iSASE) will be studied to generate such a tunable coherent seed. Other seeding
techniques, such as self‐seeding, will also be studied and compared to the iSASE scheme. The
amplification of the coherent seed in a tapered undulator to reach TW peak power requires a multi‐
dimensional optimization. The studies will include theoretical modeling, numerical simulations,
hardware prototyping, and experimental verification. This project will develop a path to generate TW x‐
ray pulses and will prototype hardware for upgrades of the LCLS and LCLS‐II.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
20
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
A Laboratory Astrophysical Jet to Study Canonical Flux Tubes
Dr. Setthivoine You, Assistant Professor
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
This project aims to simulate a magnetically‐driven jet launched by an accretion disk in the
laboratory to improve the understanding of plasma shear flows interacting with magnetic fields. The
experiment replaces an accretion disk that would rotate in the vacuum chamber at impractical speeds
with three independent concentric annular electrodes. In combination with a background magnetic
field, the radial electric field can therefore be set up to approximate the rotation profile of an accretion
disk, to produce a magnetized plasma jet with axial and azimuthal shear flows. An advanced diagnostic
capable of reconstructing 3D flow fields will track the complex flow patterns, using Doppler tomography
techniques similar to those used in medical imaging. The apparatus will thus be able to study the
fundamental role of canonical flux tubes (magnetic flux tubes with strong mass flows), and see whether
intuitions about twist, writhe and link transformations in these tubes are subject to a remarkably simple
conservation rule. With this theory of canonical flux tubes and the well‐diagnosed experiment, the
research program intends to improve the theoretical understanding of how astrophysical jets are highly
collimated, often very straight and extremely long. The fundamental role of canonical flux tubes is
directly relevant to magnetized plasmas undergoing reconnection, the origin of magnetic fields in
dynamo problems, and improved performance in magnetically‐confined fusion plasmas and advanced
space propulsion.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
21
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2013 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 61 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated May 7, 2013
Accurate Ab Initio Methods for Correlated Surface Problems
Dr. Dominika Zgid, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Transition metal surfaces are widely used in heterogeneous catalysis; however, modeling of
catalytic processes on such surfaces remains very challenging due to the difficulty in describing
accurately the electronic correlation in the d‐orbitals of the transition metals for bulk problems
containing thousands of atoms. The objective of this project is to develop new theoretical techniques to
address the challenge of correlated surfaces and to properly describe different correlations present
between the localized, strongly correlated d‐orbitals and the delocalized, weakly correlated s‐ and p‐
orbitals in a systematically improvable, ab‐initio manner. In this project, methods from both condensed
matter physics and quantum chemistry will be employed to build a computationally feasible embedding
approach that tackles the size of the problem. This newly developed approach will be used to study the
complex interactions between molecule and surface, to model directly measurable experimental
quantities such as the photoelectron spectra and to enable a systematic search for new classes of
catalytic materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
22
