DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Harnessing f‐Orbital Bonding through Precision Antenna Ligand Design for Actinide Complexation
Dr. Rebecca J. Abergel, Staff Scientist
Heavy Element Chemistry Group
Chemical Sciences Division
Energy Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Controlling the selectivity of ligands to bind actinides (such as uranium and plutonium) in
environmentally and industrially relevant environments necessitates the ability to understand and
predict the fundamental coordination properties of actinide‐specific ligands. The objective of this work
is to enable the selective tuning of spectroscopic and thermodynamic properties of specific actinide
complexes through precision ligand design and molecular recognition. A library of ligands with molecular
structures built around a variety of chemical functions will be designed and prepared, resulting in
compounds that exhibit specific actinide‐binding properties and spectroscopic features. A particular
feature that will guide the ligand selection is their efficiency at sensitizing actinide luminescence through
the so‐called antenna effect. Some chemical functionalities appended to the ligands can act as
chromophores that absorb visible light by exciting an electron from the ground state of the ligand into
an excited state followed by subsequent excitation of the actinide that ultimately results in
luminescence decay. Such energy transfer processes are finely modulated by the different contributions
to ligand binding from each of the actinide electronic orbitals. Systematic and iterative characterization
of the designed species will therefore be used to harness the contribution of the actinide f‐orbitals and
d‐orbitals on ligand‐bond formation and to characterize the influence of these orbitals on the
differences in actinide complex energetic and coordination features, including kinetic, thermodynamic
and optical properties. Understanding the fundamental bonding interactions of selective actinide ligands
presents a rich set of scientific challenges and is critical to the development of highly efficient separation
reagents. The approach taken in this project paves the way to fulfill this difficult task by combining the
precision ligand design, sensitive luminescence characterization, and theoretical modeling. The
information gained from this effort will not only provide "molecular signatures" for the designed
actinide coordination systems, it will yield fundamental knowledge of the role of f‐electrons in actinide
bonding and spectroscopic properties and will lay the foundations for further spectroscopic and
synthetic work and discovery related to nuclear energy applications such as separation and waste
storage processes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
1
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Interface‐Driven Chiral Magnetism in Ultrathin Metallic Ferromagnets: Towards Skyrmion Spintronics
Dr. Geoffrey S.D. Beach, Associate Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Magnetic skyrmions are localized chiral magnetic textures in the form of nanoscale vortices or
bubbles that are topologically protected from being ‘unwound’. Their topological nature gives rise to
rich behaviors including ordered lattice formation, emergent electrodynamics and robust current‐driven
displacement at remarkably low current densities. However, magnetic skyrmions have so far been
restricted to just a few materials and observed only at low temperatures, limiting the experimental
accessibility and technological application of these unique topological objects. This project aims to
realize magnetic skyrmions at room temperature in a new class of engineered chiral ferromagnets that
exploit broken mirror symmetry at interfaces to generate helical magnetic order. Ultrathin magnetic
heterostructures will be engineered and patterned into laterally‐confined nanostructures in which
skyrmions can be stabilized, manipulated, and detected for the first time under ambient conditions.
Static and dynamic properties will be examined using advanced x‐ray imaging and nanoscale electrical
probes to provide a fundamental understanding of topological magnetic phases. The interactions
between magnetic skyrmions and electron charge and spin currents will be studied to identify
fundamental new physics and enable device applications. These experimental studies, supported by
detailed modeling, will help launch a new subfield of skyrmion‐based spintronics in which individual
skyrmions can be used to encode, store, and transport information in high‐performance, low power
memory and logic devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
2
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Actinide N‐Donor Thermodynamics: Expanding the f‐Element Covalency Dialogue
Dr. Jenifer C. Braley, Assistant Professor
Chemistry and Geochemistry Department
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
Unraveling the fundamental chemistry of the heaviest elements remains a scientific grand
challenge. The challenges of studying the heaviest elements stem from their unique chemistry,
radiological hazards, and lack of availability. Understanding this chemistry will only become more
important as nations worldwide consider and develop peaceful nuclear technology to meet future
energy demands. To address current knowledge gaps, this research will study the chemistry of the
actinide elements uranium, neptunium, plutonium, americium, curium, berkelium, californium, and
einsteinium. While most of the elements to be studied have reasonable availability, the berkelium and
einsteinium isotopes will be produced using U.S. Geological Survey's TRIGA® Reactor located at the
Denver Federal Center. The thermodynamics of the interactions of these elements with nitrogen donor
complexants (nitrogen complexants that donate electrons) will be investigated to gain insight into how
these elements share electrons with other elements or materials. The interaction of actinides with these
complexants is particularly interesting as nitrogen has demonstrated some ability to share electrons
(bind covalently) with actinides. Resolving this chemistry will allow for improved management of used
nuclear fuel and provide the United States with key fundamental knowledge in this important area of
technology. The data that will be gathered at the extreme edge of the periodic table will elucidate
uncertain and suspected periodic trends.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
3
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
High Performance Equilibrium Solvers for Integrated Magnetic Fusion Simulations
Dr. Antoine J. Cerfon, Assistant Professor
Mathematics Department
New York University
New York, NY 10012
In tokamaks, conditions routinely reach the high temperature and pressure required for self‐
sustained fusion reactions. However, the rate of heat transport from the hot core to the colder edge is
high, so external heating must be applied to maintain these conditions. A key to making fusion an
attractive option for electricity generation is to understand heat loss mechanisms in tokamaks and to
design devices that better confine heat and reduce external heating requirements. Experimental and
theoretical evidence suggests that the turbulent behavior of hot plasmas is responsible for the observed
level of heat transport. Understanding the interplay between turbulence and heat loss is a formidable
challenge because the mechanisms are highly nonlinear and involve dynamics at vastly separate
temporal and spatial scales. Multi‐scale numerical solvers have recently been developed to address this
challenge. They compute the turbulence on a fine space‐time grid and use the results to evolve the
macroscopic properties of the plasma on a coarser grid. These promising solvers are currently limited in
their ability to model experiments because they do not include the effect of turbulence on the confining
magnetic field. Our project seeks to solve this issue by coupling the solvers with equilibrium solvers that
update the magnetic configuration. We will develop equilibrium codes specifically for this purpose, with
accuracy and speed requirements beyond existing capabilities. The codes have to be fast so that the
computational time is mostly spent on the costly turbulence calculations; they have to be accurate to
minimize uncertainties associated with error propagation. We will implement advanced numerical
methods based on integral equation formulations and algorithms for fast summation to satisfy these
performance requirements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
4
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Quantifying Global Structural Errors in Predictive Scientific Simulations
Dr. Emil M. Constantinescu, Assistant Computational Mathematician
Laboratory for Advanced Numerical Simulations
Mathematics and Computer Science Division
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439
Computational simulations of complex systems, such as climate and power grid applications, are
needed to understand physical phenomena and design efficient systems. In this context, making
accurate predictions is critical to DOE's mission. A major difficulty in predictive modeling is correctly
capturing the physics and component interactions across vastly different temporal and spatial scales.
“Structural” errors quantify what is present in the real system but not represented by the model, due to
an incomplete phenomenological understanding or misrepresentation across scales. Typically, the
model captures only a subset of the physics and component interactions, leading to structural errors in
model predictions that can result in inefficient operation or system overdesign. To address this problem,
this project will develop mathematically rigorous and robust numerical strategies for quantifying and
modeling global structural errors in complex simulations. This work constitutes a novel direction in the
way uncertainty is represented in dynamical simulations and will provide rigorous uncertainty prediction
bounds in many engineering and science applications important to the DOE mission.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
5
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
A Scintillating Xenon Bubble Chamber for Dark Matter Detection
Dr. Carl Eric Dahl, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
The nature of dark matter is one of the great mysteries of modern physics. Originally
hypothesized as a simple way to increase gravity at large scales, dark matter is now a central element of
cosmology, making up 27% of the energy density in the universe (five times the density of normal
matter). Despite this abundance, cosmological requirements that dark matter be non‐baryonic, non‐
relativistic, long‐lived and electrically neutral indicate that dark matter must lie outside the standard
model of particle physics. The leading candidate for dark matter is an as‐yet undiscovered weakly
interacting massive particle (WIMP). The PICO Collaboration (formerly PICASSO or Project in Canada to
Search for Supersymmetric Objects and COUPP or Chicagoland Observatory for Underground Particle
Physics) is one of several groups working to unambiguously detect WIMPs from our local halo in
terrestrial detectors. The bubble chamber technique employed by PICO has the unique feature that it is
not restricted to a particular target material – any superheated fluid can serve as a dark matter target.
This award will support a key exploitation of this versatility, the construction and operation of a
prototype scintillating xenon bubble chamber. The motivation for this technology is twofold. It will allow
a direct comparison between bubble chambers and the xenon time projection chambers that currently
lead the dark matter detection field, critical for both present calibration and future characterization of
any dark matter signal. The xenon bubble chamber should also prove to be a superior detection
technology in its own right, combining the extreme (10‐10) gamma‐ and beta‐insensitivity, easy 3‐D
position reconstruction, high efficiency and inexpensive instrumentation of the bubble chamber with
the energy resolution and chemical stability of a xenon scintillation detector. The work supported here
will pave the way for a future large‐scale scintillating xenon bubble chamber for dark matter detection.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
6
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Probing the Magnetic Excitations in Complex Oxide Interfaces and Heterostructures
Dr. Mark P.M. Dean, Assistant Physicist
X‐ray Scattering Group
Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department
Basic Energy Sciences Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
When atomically thin layers of transition metal oxides are sandwiched together, they exhibit
numerous novel electronic properties. Our understanding of these interface phenomena, however, is
limited by our lack of tools for probing the details of the magnetic interactions in atomically thin layers.
This program exploits a revolution in inelastic x‐ray scattering techniques to measure the magnetic
excitations at these interfaces. These magnetic excitations encode the parameters that describe
magnetic interactions in these thin layers of transition metal oxide materials. A systematic study of the
various interfacial effects will be carried out, first at existing synchrotron sources and ultimately at the
National Synchrotron Light Source II where the world‐leading brightness translates into a factor of 10
improvement in resolution for such measurements. The goal of the program is to obtain a detailed
understanding of the role of interfacial effects in determining magnetic interactions. This is a vital step
towards exploiting these effects to obtain the desired properties for next generation functional devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
7
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Quasiparticle Couplings in Transport of Heat, Charge, and Spin for Novel Energy Materials
Dr. Olivier A. Delaire, Research and Development Staff Member
Scattering and Thermophysics Group
Materials Science and Technology Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Understanding the microscopic processes involved in the transport and conversion of energy
from the atomic‐scale to the meso‐scale is critical for the development of next‐generation materials for
energy sustainability. The goal of this project is to understand heat, spin and charge transport in novel
energy materials by elucidating the couplings among microscopic degrees‐of‐freedom of atomic
vibrations, spins, and electrons. At a microscopic level, these couplings result from interactions of
phonons (atomic vibrations) with other phonons, resulting in lattice thermal resistivity, or interaction of
phonons with electrons, causing electrical resistivity in metals. An additional and exciting dimension to
these interactions has arisen from the realization of the importance of the interaction of phonons with
magnons (spin oscillations) in materials for novel spin‐caloritronic applications. This project will
systematically investigate these quasi‐particle interactions using state‐of‐the‐art neutron and x‐ray
scattering techniques, optical spectroscopy, synthesis and transport measurements, and first‐principles
computer simulations. This new information and understanding about the interactions among
quasiparticles will rationalize the interplay of thermal transport and spintronic properties for
applications in novel devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
8
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Competing Orders in Correlated Materials: Impact of Disorder and Non‐Equilibrium Perturbations
Dr. Rafael M. Fernandes, Assistant Professor
School of Physics and Astronomy
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
Correlated materials provide unique access to the microscopic behavior of interacting electrons,
unveiling fundamental properties of the quantum world while serving as cornerstones for exciting
technological applications. A hallmark of correlated materials is the existence of multiple competing
ordered states such as unconventional superconductivity, magnetism, and charge order. Controlling and
understanding these competing electronic phases is a fundamental problem of contemporary
condensed matter physics not only because this competition, for example, suppresses high‐temperature
superconductivity but also because it can give rise to novel emergent states in which electrons self‐
organize in inhomogeneous patterns. This project will employ a multifaceted theoretical approach to
tackle this problem, focusing on the copper‐based and iron‐based high‐temperature superconductors. It
will combine phenomenological models and quantum many‐body techniques and consider a variety of
experimental probes. Realistic features of these correlated materials – such as disorder – will be
investigated, and new directions will be explored, such as the use of non‐equilibrium perturbations to
probe and control phases that compete with superconductivity. The goal of this project is a deeper
understanding of the role of competing phases in correlated materials and the discovery of novel ways
of tuning and exploring them with potential implications for applications and new technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
9
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
High Repetition Rate Ultra‐Fast Electron Diffraction Development
Dr. Daniele Filippetto, Research Scientist
Center for Beam Physics
Accelerator and Fusion Research Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Combined information on structure and dynamics of atoms and molecules in matter is an
essential requisite for understanding the laws of nature to the level that would enable control and
mimicking. Natural time scales of structural changes expand well below the picosecond with
characteristic lengths of the order of Angstroms, calling for instruments with unprecedented resolution
in the four dimensions. This research project aims at the development of an innovative tool for ultra‐fast
science that will provide access to four‐dimensional visualization of atomic and molecular dynamics. A
high‐brightness, high‐repetition rate electron source will be used to produce relativistic femtosecond
pulses with high peak and average flux. An electron diffraction beamline will deliver electron pulses to
the sample for pump‐probe experiments at high repetition rate (up to MHz). Ultra‐short pulses will
provide direct access to femtosecond dynamics, and the high electron flux will enhance the spatial
accuracy, enabling dynamical studies of complex molecules in gas and liquid phase. The instrument will
combine high accelerating fields, relativistic energies, and high repetition rate to tackle most of the
issues limiting the resolution of ultra‐short electron probes such as pump‐probe velocity mismatch, time
and pointing jitters, and low signal‐to‐noise ratio. The blending of time resolution and high dose rate at
the sample will have an enormous impact on many different fields of science, unveiling the connections
between the structure and the function of biological systems, enhancing our understanding of chemical
and biochemical reactions, and following transformation pathways that could ultimately lead us to more
efficient energy storage and clean energy production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
10
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Time‐Resolved Electrical, Optical, and Thermal Probes of Topological Spin Textures in Magnetic
Nanostructures
Dr. Gregory D. Fuchs, Assistant Professor
School of Applied and Engineering Physics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14835
Efforts to understand and control magnetic states on nanometer length scales have revealed
new fundamental science and enabled the development of new technology. The objective of this project
is to investigate the dynamical motion of recently discovered topological spin textures confined in
nanoscale magnetic channels. These magnetic spin textures, known as magnetic skyrmions, have a
nanoscale magnetic configuration that is topologically distinct from ordinary magnetic states, giving
them “particle‐like” properties and potentially providing a measure of protection from defects. In
addition, they move under extremely small applied currents, making them interesting for ultra‐low
power control of information at the nanoscale. Experimental progress in understanding the motion of
individual skyrmions has been limited because of skyrmions’ nanoscale size and because existing
measurements with single skyrmion sensitivity lack time resolution. To overcome these barriers, this
research will combine a variety of techniques, including advanced nanofabrication, high‐frequency
electrical measurements, Lorentz transmission electron microscopy, and magneto‐optical/magneto‐
thermal microscopy. With this hybrid approach, this project will examine how skyrmions move in
response to electrical, thermal, and magnetic stimuli. The fundamental insights into magnetic skyrmion
motion may lead to new approaches for storing and manipulating information at the nanoscale using
topologically protected magnetic states.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
11
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Statistical Methods for Exascale Performance Modeling
Dr. Todd Gamblin, Computer Scientist
Computer Science Group
Center for Applied Scientific Computing
Computation Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
Large computer simulations are critical for a broad range of scientific disciplines. Despite this
need, adapting a scientific simulation code to run efficiently on a new supercomputer is tedious and
time consuming. For the most complex applications, the process can take six months or more. Predictive
mathematical models of performance and power consumption could accelerate this process, but the
behavior of modern adaptive codes can change, depending on the input data. This makes existing
modeling techniques difficult to apply. This project will develop statistical models of applications that
can represent adaptive, data‐dependent behavior in a scalable manner. The project will also develop
techniques to reduce the complexity of application models so that they are easily understood by
application developers. These models will provide simulation developers with insights that allow them
to quickly optimize the performance of their code, ensuring that applications can take full advantage of
the performance of future exascale machines.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
12
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Strongly‐Driven Attosecond Electron‐Dynamics in Periodic Media
Dr. Shambhu Ghimire, Associate Staff Scientist
PULSE Institute
Chemical Sciences Division
Photon Science Directorate
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
This project uses intense laser pulses to create extremely fast electron oscillations in crystalline
materials. The oscillations occur on time scales measured in attoseconds, or billionths of a billionth of a
second. The objective of this research is to initiate, control, and measure this attosecond electron
motion using specially crafted laser pulses. The strong electric fields associated with these pulses
interact with the periodic structure of the crystal to create a nonlinear electrical current. This, in turn,
causes the crystal to emit attosecond bursts of light that are precisely synchronized with the driving
laser field. This research will lead to a fundamental understanding of high‐intensity laser matter
interactions of relevance to novel material processing and information technology. Controlling electrical
currents in materials on an attosecond time scale may lead to the development of devices that are a
million times faster than those possible with conventional methods.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
13
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Unifying Principles for Catalytic Hydrotreating Processes
Dr. Lars C. Grabow, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering
University of Houston
Houston, TX 77204
Fast pyrolysis of biomass, a renewable and sustainable resource, is a promising low‐cost
technology that produces bio‐oil suitable for use as transportation fuel after an appropriate upgrade
step. The upgrade can be achieved by reducing the high oxygen content of up to 35 – 40 wt.% through
hydrotreatment over heterogeneous catalysts, but the complexity of bio‐oils with ca. 400 different
oxygenated compounds and the fact that this technology has only recently gained interest are both
responsible for the lack of fundamental knowledge in this field. In contrast, the petroleum industry has
been using hydrotreating reactors with cobalt and nickel promoted molybdenum sulfide based catalysts
for the removal of sulfur impurities for decades, and the catalyst structure, nature of the active site, and
elementary reaction steps are largely understood. This project builds on the hypothesis that the
hydrotreating processes for the removal of oxygen and sulfur are fundamentally similar at the atomic‐
scale and existing knowledge from the treatment of petroleum derived feedstock can be leveraged for
the design of novel catalysts for the upgrade of bio‐oil. Electronic structure simulations on high
performance computing infrastructure and kinetic modeling will be used to improve our mechanistic
understanding of bio‐oil hydrotreatment and to derive characteristic catalyst properties that are
responsible for high activity and selectivity. From the resulting structure‐function relationships we can
extract common features of hydrotreating catalysts and develop unifying principles that lead to the
accelerated design of novel materials for bio‐oil upgrade.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
14
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
New Searches for Ultralight Particles
Dr. Peter W. Graham, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
There are many lines of evidence indicating physics beyond the Standard Model of Particle
Physics and Cosmology. In particular, the observational evidence for dark matter proves there must be
new physics beyond what is known. There are many searches for new particles, for example at the Large
Hadron Collider or in dark matter direct detection experiments. However, almost all of these searches
are designed to detect new heavy particles that deposit significant energy in a detector through single,
hard particle scatterings. There are few searches for new light fields such as the axion or dark photon,
which also make good dark matter candidates. This project will improve the ability to detect such light
particles through the invention of novel experimental techniques. In particular, there is the possibility of
searching for the dark photon through the coupling it will induce between two resonant microwave
cavities. If electromagnetically shielded from each other, such cavities will only couple through a new
light field such as a dark photon. The calculations in this project will greatly increase the reach of
previous experiments and motivate novel proposals. This work may be extended to make a novel
detector for dark photon dark matter using a high‐Q resonator inside electromagnetic shielding. This
experiment would extend the reach for dark photon dark matter by many orders of magnitude in both
cross section and mass. Further, extensions of previous proposals for axion detection using nuclear
magnetic resonance and spin precession technology will allow for novel types of dark matter detectors
searching for dark matter coupled to nucleon or electron spins. Such technology may even allow a novel
type of neutrino detector that measures total neutrino flux instead of energy deposition. By proposing
such new experiments this project will improve the ability to detect many new types of dark matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
15
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Impurity Doping of Niobium for Ultra‐Efficient Superconducting RF Cavities
Dr. Anna Grassellino, Peoples Fellow
SRF Development Department
Technical Division
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL 60510
Improving the performance of superconducting radio frequency (SRF) cavities is a critical task on
the way to realizing future goals in accelerator technology at the energy and intensity frontiers as well as
at the cutting edge of low and medium energy nuclear physics or for accelerators for industrial
applications and medical purposes. The objective of this research is to develop SRF accelerating cavities
performing consistently with higher quality factors than can be currently achieved with the‐state‐of‐the‐
art cavity surface processing. Increasing the efficiency of niobium SRF cavities is of great importance for
nearly all SRF accelerators, especially those where a substantial part of capital and operating costs is
dominated by the cavity cryogenic losses. It was recently demonstrated at Fermilab that introducing a
small amount of impurities like nitrogen at the surface drastically modifies the behavior of the niobium
cavity surface resistance, resulting in cavity quality factors two to three times higher. The results so far
indicate that doping the cavity surface with a certain (above typical) concentration of impurities
modifies beneficially the RF surface resistance. The goal of this research is therefore to improve upon
these recent findings by finding the ideal concentration and dopant to achieve the highest possible
quality factor at different gradients. This research will also study whether higher than typical
accelerating gradients can be achieved via doping. The final outcome of this work will be to have
different optimized and consolidated surface processing recipes for quality factor maximization for SRF
structures operating at different frequencies and gradients.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
16
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Exploration of Main‐Ion Properties at the Boundary of Fusion Reactors
Dr. Brian A. Grierson, Staff Research Physicist
ITER and Tokamaks Department
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
Princeton, NJ 08543
ITER ("the way" in Latin) will be the world's largest fusion experiment and is currently being
constructed by an international team to demonstrate the scientific and technical feasibility of fusion
energy. Success of the ITER mission relies on the achievement and sustainment of high‐confinement (H‐
mode) plasmas that operate stably and with high performance. The core reactor performance is closely
linked to the ion temperature and velocity near the plasma edge, and a primary focus of modern
tokamak plasma physics is to develop models able to predict the edge parameters and transport
processes to extrapolate to ITER and beyond. Currently, the physics basis for a prediction of the edge
pressure, ion temperature and plasma rotational velocity remains elusive. At the edge of an H‐mode
plasma the main‐ion properties are known to deviate significantly from the more commonly measured
impurity ion properties, and therefore a critical research need is to validate current state‐of‐the‐art
simulations of the tokamak H‐mode pedestal with a diagnostic that measures the properties of the
main‐ion fusion fuel, deuterium. This research combines diagnostic development with model validation.
A new diagnostic system will determine the deuterium plasma temperature, velocity and density at the
plasma edge for a range of experimental configurations and establish the scaling of these parameters
with external actuators such as plasma current, shape and heating. Key dependencies identified by
these new measurements will be compared to impurity ion measurements and to transport theories in
the edge. Comprehensive main‐ion measurements and validated physical models of the plasma edge
will strengthen the physics basis of H‐mode operation for ITER and future fusion reactors.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
17
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Non‐Equilibrium Atomic Physics in High Energy Density Material
Dr. Stephanie B. Hansen, Distinguished Member of the Technical Staff
Inertial Confinement Fusion Target Design Department
Radiation and Fusion Physics Group
Pulsed Power Sciences Center
Science and Technology Division
Sandia National Laboratories, New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87123
The objective of this project is to develop a coherent modeling framework for non‐equilibrium
atomic physics in extreme material environments. Today's high‐energy‐density physics facilities are
exploring new regimes of matter at extreme conditions, compressing megajoules (MJ) of energy into
microscale targets over nano‐ or femto‐second timescales to produce radiation‐dominated, highly
magnetized, and extremely transient non‐equilibrium plasmas. Currently, atomic‐scale models used to
design and diagnose these experiments almost universally assume full or partial equilibrium. This project
will systematically remove equilibrium constraints from the existing fully quantum mechanical self‐
consistent‐field model, calculating the response of electronic wavefunctions to high fields and time‐
varying non‐thermal photon, electron, and ion distributions. These wavefunctions will be used to
generate predictions of observable quantities for comparison to experiments including transport
coefficients and the detailed emission and scattering spectra that reveal the electronic and ionic
structure of matter. The code developed will be made openly accessible to other researchers in the
high‐energy‐density physics community.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
18
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Search for New Phenomena at the 13 TeV LHC: Fast Start and Strong Finish
Dr. James Hirschauer, Wilson Fellow
CMS Center
Particle Physics Sector
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
Batavia, IL 60510
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva,
Switzerland will increase its center‐of‐mass energy from 8 TeV to 13 TeV in 2015, thereby providing one
of the greatest single extensions of direct sensitivity to new physics over the next two decades. The
Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment must be poised to efficiently analyze the first data at this
energy for evidence of physics beyond the standard model (BSM) and to collect large samples of high
quality data in order to fully characterize a discovery or to continue BSM searches in the longer term.
Motivated by these requirements, the objectives of this research program are two‐fold. First, the
research involves searches for supersymmetry (SUSY), a leading candidate for BSM physics, which
provides an explanation for dark matter hypothesized in astronomy and which helps solve theoretical
problems related to the stability associated with the recently observed Higgs boson. In particular,
searches for SUSY particles decaying to hadronic final states will be performed with the first 2015 data.
Subsequently, as more data are collected at the LHC, these searches will evolve towards challenging
signatures with low missing energy associated with undetected SUSY particles. In addition, the project
aims to upgrade the CMS calorimeter subsystem to allow longer term operations in the high radiation
environments foreseen at the LHC with a focus on the development of next generation readout
electronics and new active materials with enhanced radiation tolerances.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
19
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Kinetics of Particles with Short‐Range Interactions
Dr. Miranda C. Holmes‐Cerfon, Assistant Professor
Mathematics Department
New York University
New York, NY 10012
Nano‐ and micro‐scale particles provide a promising set of building blocks for many new energy‐
applicable technologies, such as materials for energy storage or meta‐materials. Designing particles so
they assemble spontaneously into a desired structure is critical for making these technologies efficiently,
but performing this optimization is a challenge because the timescales of the short inter‐particle
attractions are typically much faster than the long, diffusive timescales of assembly. This project will
develop a set of conceptual and computational tools to analyze the kinetics of assembly for systems
dominated by short‐range interactions and to optimize over the set of possible parameters to design
building blocks that assemble efficiently.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
20
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
In‐situ Thermodynamics Measurements at Metal Oxides‐Solution Interfaces Using Flow Adsorption
Microcalorimetry
Dr. Nadine Kabengi, Assistant Professor
Department of Geosciences
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30302
The overarching goal of this project is to complete a systematic study of the thermodynamic
properties of ion exchange, ligand sorption and surface charge reactions occurring at four metal oxides
surfaces: goethite, gibbsite, rutile and quartz. Metal oxides/solution interfaces are critical for our
environmental and energy future. In Earth‐surface environment, metal oxides are ubiquitous in nature,
existing as relatively pure minerals such as gibbsite and goethite, and as poorly crystalized hydrous
oxyhydroxide phases, such as ferrihydrite, that bind and coat other soil components. They are arguably
the most important components controlling the solubility and mobility of anthropogenic pollutants in
the environment. In technological settings, metal oxides such as rutile and quartz are critical for our
energy future as catalysts for the synthesis of chemicals and for the production of fuel cells, solar fuel
photocatalysts, and solid reactants. The work will be accomplished primarily through the construction
and application of novel flow adsorption microcalorimetry instrumentation and techniques. These
unique and specialized flow microcalorimeters will operate at various temperatures and solution
chemical compositions, most notably absent CO . In addition to key thermodynamic parameters
2
(enthalpies), calorimetric measurements provide a wealth of mechanistic information about reaction
energetics and kinetics, surface charge characteristics, and structure‐reactivity or selectivity
relationships, all obtained in situ and in real‐time. Determining thermodynamic properties for
contrasting metal oxide sizes, different ligand properties, various solution chemical compositions, and
across temperature ranges will help us understand the relationship between a metal oxide surface
structure and its reactivity well enough to predict its behavior and performance under a suite of variable
conditions. Considering the centrality of the studied elementary chemical reactions in geochemical,
environmental, biological and technological applications, the project will generate data and produce
new analytical capabilities of value to scientists across a spectrum of disciplines and specializations.
Integrating key thermodynamic data with the advances and sophistication other theoretical,
experimental and computational methods have achieved maps out the blueprints of the next‐
generation understanding of metal oxides surfaces and interfaces.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
21
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Characterization of Backgrounds for EXO
Dr. Lisa J. Kaufman, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408
Neutrinoless double beta decay could occur if an atomic nucleus decays radioactively by
emitting only two electrons, in contrast to the ordinary double beta decay in which two neutrinos
emerge as well. Observation of this exotic decay mode would provide evidence that neutrinos are their
own anti‐particles, and that the symmetry of lepton number conservation is violated. Its observation
would also provide strong experimental guidance for theories that go beyond the Standard Model,
yielding insights into the origin of neutrino mass and the unexplained excess of matter over antimatter
in the observable universe. The goal of this research is to search for neutrinoless double beta decay in
the context of the Enriched Xenon Observatory experiment both in its current form (EXO‐200), as well as
in its next phase (nEXO or “next EXO”). One of the most important aspects of the design and data
analysis of this experiment is to identify backgrounds that might obscure an observation of this
extremely rare process. The main aims of this research are characterization of experimental background
due to interactions of ambient neutrons with xenon and analysis of the EXO‐200 data to develop
techniques for removing this source of background for the planned nEXO experiment. Using xenon as
the target material also provides a unique opportunity to directly tag the barium ions that are products
of the decay, thus eliminating backgrounds from all other sources. A laboratory at Indiana University is
being developed to study the mobility of single barium ions in the liquid xenon in order to achieve a
barium‐tagging capability in a second phase of nEXO.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
22
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Exploring Novel QCD Matter in Proton‐Proton and Proton‐Nucleus Collisions at the LHC
Dr. Wei Li, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
William Marsh Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
In relativistic heavy‐ion collisions, a new state of hot and dense matter with quarks and gluons
freed from the protons and neutrons into which they are normally bound is created as predicted by the
theory of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). The most striking feature of this quark‐gluon plasma (QGP)
matter is the evident flow of particles out of the collisions, which resembles a liquid of strongly coupled
particles with nearly zero frictional resistance to the flow or viscosity. It was previously thought that the
formation of the QGP fluid is only feasible in heavy nucleus‐nucleus collisions where the system size is
sufficiently large for a temperature to be established. However, the correlation of detected particles
seen as evidence of the flow from the QGP created in the heavy ion collisions have unexpectedly been
discovered recently in high‐multiplicity (large number of final‐state particles) proton‐proton (pp) and
proton‐lead (pPb) collisions at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). This finding suggests the possibility of
creating a QGP droplet in a system that is 10 times smaller than a nucleus‐nucleus collision. The
proposed research will explore the properties of this novel correlation of particles in pp and pPb
collisions in detail. Since very high‐multiplicity pp and pPb events only occur on an extremely rare basis,
this research will utilize a new online trigger strategy with the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
experiment to improve detection and data collection of these events for future LHC runs. The
comprehensive program of data analysis proposed will aim to pin down the origin of the particle
correlations, and shed light on novel properties of QCD in high‐density pp and pPb collisions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
23
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Search for New Physics with Top Quarks and Upgrade to the ATLAS Liquid Argon Calorimeter
Dr. Stephanie A. Majewski, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
The recent successful discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the
European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland provides a long sought‐after key to
the Standard Model of particle physics. However, the existence (and mass) of this fundamental scalar
does not resolve the tension between the electroweak and Planck scales, hinting at the possibility of
new physics that may be accessible at the LHC. The objective of this research is to search for signs of
such new physics, in particular for the existence of a supersymmetric partner to the top quark, using the
ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) detector at the LHC to reconstruct signatures of top quarks and
missing energy from corresponding undetected particles. Furthermore, in order to ensure that the full
potential of the LHC is harnessed in future searches for new physics, the project also entails the upgrade
of the ATLAS Liquid Argon Calorimeter read‐out electronics, thereby improving the performance of
boosted objects, jets, and missing energy triggers for planned higher luminosity running conditions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
24
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Exploring Superconductivity at the Edge of Magnetic or Structural Instabilities
Dr. Ni Ni, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
This project aims at understanding the interplay among structural, magnetic and electronic
degrees of freedom in unconventional superconductors, a class of materials in one of the most
challenging and interesting areas of condensed matter physics. Compared with conventional
superconductors, unconventional superconductors cannot be explained by current theories and typically
exhibit high critical temperatures (Tc’s), meaning they can conduct electricity with low losses, some of
them able to do this at or above liquid nitrogen temperatures. This property makes them of particular
use for applications in energy generation and electrical energy transmission. These materials are also of
fundamental scientific interest because the existence of structural, magnetic, orbital/charge and
superconducting orders provide a platform in understanding and ultimately manipulating these
interactions. Therefore, the objective of this research project is to design, fabricate and characterize
new superconducting materials, including the iron‐based superconductors that lie at the edge of
structural/magnetic instability, using solid state reaction, crystal‐growth methods, electrical transport
and thermodynamic measurements with and without magnetic field. The goals of this research project
are to help understand the relationship among different orders in these materials, to examine the
structure‐property relationship, and to shed light on the electron‐electron interactions responsible for
the superconducting phase transition.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
25
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Understanding Microbial Carbon Cycling in Soils Using Novel Metabolomics Approaches
Dr. Trent R. Northen, Chemist Staff Scientist/Engineer
Department of Bioenergy/GTL and Structural Biology
Life Sciences Division
Biosciences Area
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
To predict and mitigate the adverse effects of climate change, we urgently need to improve our
understanding of carbon cycling in soils. Carbon is accumulated in soils as decayed plant matter and
chemically transformed by the metabolism of microorganisms that live in the ground. The products
(metabolites) of these transformations carried out by microbes make up a large fraction of the soil
carbon. While very little is known about the metabolite composition of soils, much is known about the
types of microorganisms found in soils. This is a result of significant efforts to study soil microbes using
DNA sequencing technologies. Unfortunately, we lack vital data that will enable scientists to link this
sequence information to the microbial metabolic transformations that govern carbon cycling in soils.
This project will help bridge this gap by resolving the current 'black box' of soil metabolites and develop
approaches to understand how specific microorganisms produce and transform the soil metabolite
pools. This will be achieved by pioneering analytical technologies to identify and quantify soil
metabolites. We will use this technology to characterize the cascades of microbial activities that follow
wetting of dry soils to correlate soil metabolite composition and microorganisms' activities. We will then
develop detailed methods to determine the uptake and release of specific soil metabolites by key soil
bacteria to make and test predictions of carbon cycling based on DNA sequence data. This program will
provide an urgently needed complement to DNA sequencing that will enable the understanding and
mathematical modeling of soil carbon cycling, ultimately improving our ability to predict and mitigate
the effects of climate change.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
26
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Elucidating the Determinants of Alkali Ionic Conductivity in Oxide and Sulfide Frameworks
Dr. Shyue Ping Ong, Assistant Professor
Department of NanoEngineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
The facile conduction of alkali ions in oxide and sulfide host structures is of critical importance in
energy storage. Today, the dominant form of energy storage in consumer electronics and increasingly in
large scale applications such as electric vehicles is the rechargeable alkali‐ion battery, a device that
functions entirely on the basis of the reversible transport of alkali ions. The Li+/Na+ conductivity of a
cathode (typically a transition metal oxide) has a direct influence on the rate capability of a Li/Na‐ion
rechargeable battery. Alkali ion conductivity is arguably of even greater importance in the solid oxide
and sulfide electrolytes currently being investigated for high safety, all‐solid‐state batteries, where the
diffusion length scales are significantly larger than in the electrodes. This project will elucidate the
structural and chemical factors determining alkali ion conductivity in oxide and sulfide frameworks using
large‐scale first principles calculations and topological analysis. We will approach this problem through a
series of detailed investigations into prototypical structures and chemistries as well as through a
broader study carried out over a large number of materials using data mining techniques. The ambition
of this project is to go beyond mere screening of materials and to acquire the insights necessary to
achieve true “reverse design” capability to build high alkali ion conductivity structures from constituent
anion frameworks, cation chemistry, and topology design.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
27
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Microbial Carbon Tranformations in Wet Tropical Soils: The Importance of Redox Fluctuations
Dr. Jennifer Pett‐Ridge, Staff Scientist & Deputy Group Leader
Isotopic Signatures Group
Chemical Sciences Division
Physical and Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
Tropical forest soils store more carbon (C) ‐in the form of plant litter and decomposed organic
matter‐ than any other terrestrial ecosystem and play a critical role in the production of greenhouse
gases (methane, nitrous oxide, carbon dioxide) that affect both atmospheric chemistry and climate.
Humid tropical forests also exchange vast amounts of carbon, water, and energy with the atmosphere
and can lose large amounts of dissolved carbon via runoff and leaching. The rapid carbon cycling
characteristic of wet tropical ecosystems is driven in part by high rainfall and warm temperatures. This
combination of environmental conditions causes tropical soils to alternate between oxygenated and
anaerobic conditions and affects the behavior of tropical soil microorganisms that regulate many
aspects of the belowground carbon cycle. In the coming half century, tropical forests are predicted to
see a 2‐5 degree Celsius temperature increase and substantial differences in the amount and timing of
rainfall. Although the importance of tropical soils to the global C cycle is clear, we have a surprisingly
poor understanding of how soil carbon cycling in wet tropical forests will respond to climate change.
This makes predicting future climate impacts extremely difficult. Our ability to forecast how new
moisture and temperature patterns will shape tropical microbial activity is also a gap in knowledge
because so little is known about the fundamental abilities and chemical preferences of tropical soil
microorganisms. If wet tropical forests experience shifts in rainfall patterns, becoming generally drier
and more aerated, microbially‐mediated processes that produce greenhouse gases or help store soil
carbon will likely be affected. Only a few studies of microbial diversity have been conducted in wet
tropical soils, and only a handful of them have evaluated microbial function with modern DNA
sequencing technologies. This project will examine the genomic content and potential of tropical soil
microorganisms as they experience shifts in soil temperature, moisture, and oxygen availability. By also
tracking the degradation and fate of organic carbon compounds, this work will increase the accuracy of
predictions about how microbial processes affect whether organic carbon is retained or lost from
tropical systems. The mechanistic understanding produced by this research will directly benefit attempts
to improve the predictive capacity of mathematical models that forecast future tropical soil carbon
balance.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
28
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Understanding the Roles of Cloud Microphysics and Land Surface Coupling Feedbacks in Multi‐Scale
Predictions of Central US Summer Hydroclimate
Dr. Mike S. Pritchard, Assistant Professor
Department of Earth System Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
The climate sensitivities of the water cycle on regional scales are highly uncertain. Inspired by
recent advances in solving the zeroth order problem of explicitly representing rainfall by organized
summer storm systems in global climate models, this project seeks to understand next‐order
uncertainties linked to microphysics and land surface interactions. The primary analysis tool is the next‐
generation “Super‐Parameterized” Community Earth System Model (SPCESM), which naturally bridges
the meso‐synoptic atmospheric scale gap by explicitly resolving two atmospheric scale regimes
(planetary and cloud‐resolving) through a heterogeneous multiscale grid. Superparameterized hindcast
simulations of the Midlatitude Continental Convective Clouds Experiment (MC3E) field campaign (April‐
May 2011) will be used to investigate two issues, validated against high quality data from the
Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) Facility's Southern Great Plains (SGP) site and against MC3E
aircraft data. The first goal is to understand how uncertain assumptions about microphysics affect the
propagation and structure of Central US storms in superparameterized global simulations. Applying field
and ARM validation data will help optimize uncertain microphysical parameters in SPCESM. Sensitivity
tests will probe questions such as the following: What is the role of buffering by non‐local feedbacks on
the microphysical sensitivities of explicitly simulated midlatitude convective systems? Do higher‐order
microphysics improve the partitioning between suspended/falling liquid/ice condensate? Does
evaporative cooling of condensate linked to mesoscale storm organization play a critical role in enabling
long‐range propagating mid‐latitude storms or is advection of potential vorticity the dominant
controlling factor? The second problem is to understand the effects of explicitly resolved deep
convection on land surface coupling energetics in superparameterized simulations. Results will be
validated against soil moisture and surface flux observations from the ARM sites. Sensitivity tests will
deconstruct the nonlinear complexities in land‐atmosphere coupling feedbacks to address the following
questions: How exotic is a negative soil‐moisture‐rainfall feedback when convection is explicitly
resolved? How critical is explicitly resolved land heterogeneity for realistically representing mesoscale
land‐convection interactions in the context of regional and global hydrology? Are proposed irrigation‐
driven feedbacks on the Southwest Monsoon robust to a realistic representation of the mechanisms
that drive convective precipitation in the Central US?
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
29
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Detector Development towards Precision Measurements of Neutrino Mixing
Dr. Xin Qian, Assistant Physicist
Electronic Detector Group
Nuclear and Particle Physics Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
The mission of Department of Energy (DOE) Office of High Energy Physics (HEP) is to understand
how our universe works at its most fundamental level through discovery and study of the most
elementary constituents of matter and energy. One such constituent is the neutrino, a ubiquitous yet
elusive particle that requires vast and sensitive detectors to observe. This research project focuses on
detector development for precision experiments to measure neutrino properties, such as the Long‐
Baseline Neutrino Experiment (LBNE), a flagship HEP experiment for which data collection is planned to
start in 2025. More specifically, this project seeks to improve the performance of large (many kilo tons)
liquid argon (LAr) Time Projection Chambers (TPC). The team will refine our understanding of the most
important scientific and technical requirements for LArTPC detectors to achieve high accuracy
measurements of neutrino parameters, develop improved argon purification procedures, optimize
detector designs, and analyze data from existing LArTPC detectors to verify expected performance.
Supported by the extensive detector development experience and resources at Brookhaven National
Laboratory, this project will strengthen the technical capability and overall physics potential of large
LArTPCs and LBNE.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
30
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Incorporating the Hydrological Controls on Carbon Cycling in Floodplain Ecosystems into Earth System
Models (ESMs)
Dr. Joel C. Rowland, Scientist
Atmosphere, Climate & Ecosystem Sciences Team
Earth Systems Observations Group
Earth & Environmental Science Division
Science, Technology & Engineering Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87545
Floodplains are a critical missing component of Earth System Models (ESMs). Seasonally
inundated regions are the dominant natural source of global methane (CH ) emissions, and floodplains
4
comprise the single largest terrestrial sink for carbon shed from the land to terrestrial waters. The
annual burial of carbon in continental sediments exceeds that buried in ocean sediments by an order of
magnitude. To close the terrestrial carbon budget and accurately predict land fluxes to oceans, the
lateral exchange of carbon between rivers and floodplain systems must be incorporated into ESM
representations of the land surface. This research will develop a new representation of the physical
dynamics of floodplains within the vegetated land unit of the Community Land Model (CLM). Unique to
this land representation will be the capability to model the exchange of sediment, carbon, and other
particulate constituents, between floodplains and rivers. River and floodplain physical dynamics will be
directly coupled, allowing for the eventual modeling of biogeochemical (BGC) feedbacks between
floodplains and rivers. The development of this model will use geomorphic scaling laws to correlate
dynamic landscape processes to measurable and/or predictable land surface properties. In the second
half of this project, field work and high resolution process‐resolving models will be used to quantify
sensitivities of floodplain BGC cycling to both scaling simplifications used to parameterize floodplains in
ESMs and to system heterogeneities not resolvable in global‐scale ESMs.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
31
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Scalable and Energy‐Efficient Methods for Interactive Exploration of Scientific Data
Dr. Florin Rusu, Assistant Professor
School of Engineering
University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95343
This project will investigate novel methods and algorithms for interactive exploration of
scientific data. Interactive exploration of scientific data obtained from experimental measurements or
generated in simulations is a hard problem because the size of the data is extremely large, making even
the execution of a single query time‐consuming; the structure of the data varies across scientific
applications; and data analysis algorithms are complex and continuously evolving. Three directions will
be explored: parallel in‐situ data processing methods with speculative loading and overlapped query
execution that allow for data to be analyzed in place, multi‐query processing strategies that allow
complete data access sharing across the entire evaluation while maximizing the number of queries that
can be executed in parallel, and parallel processing architectures that overlap normal query execution
and randomized estimation in order to identify and eliminate non‐informative queries early in the
evaluation. The final goal of the project is to design and implement a system that integrates these
research directions and makes interactive exploration a reality, even for the largest scientific datasets
generated in many DOE projects, while providing considerable energy savings by minimizing data
movement.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
32
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Development of a Comprehensive Description of High‐Energy Nuclear Collisions at RHIC and LHC and
Electron‐Ion Collisions at a Future Electron‐Ion‐Collider
Dr. Bjoern P. Schenke, Assistant Physicist
Nuclear Theory Group
Physics Department
Nuclear & Particle Physics Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
Most of the visible matter in our universe is located in the nuclei of atoms. Our goal is to gain
deeper understanding of nuclear matter and its interactions governed by the theory of quantum
chromo‐dynamics (QCD). Nuclear collisions performed at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) can probe the structure of nuclei and create a novel state of matter, the
Quark‐Gluon‐Plasma (QGP). Its properties include almost perfect fluidity, opaqueness to highly energetic
jets, and long‐range correlations between produced particles. A detailed physical understanding of these
fascinating properties and extraction of quantitative information from experimental data requires a
complete theoretical description of the produced system and its space‐time evolution. We will develop a
multi‐component numerical framework, which is required by the complexity of nuclear collisions, to
provide this theoretical description. It will include QCD based computations of the gluon distribution in a
highly energetic nucleus, including quantum evolution, classical field dynamics of the early time after a
collision, viscous fluid dynamics to describe the later stages, and the interaction of high momentum
probes with the fluid based on perturbative QCD. We will be able to determine how perfect the
produced fluid is, extract limits on how small the smallest droplet of fluid can be, and gain deeper insight
into the structure of nuclei at high energy, including gluon saturation phenomena. This research will
benefit the physics programs for heavy‐ion collisions at RHIC and LHC as well as a future Electron‐Ion‐
Collider (EIC).
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
33
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Advanced Methods for Immersed Domain Multi‐Physics Computations
Dr. Guglielmo Scovazzi, Associate Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
Multi‐physics problems have become dominant in the computational sciences. Among the many
relevant applications at the Department of Energy, fluid/structure interaction is a prominent example in
wind energy and nuclear reactor systems. A key feature of such systems is the geometric complexity of
computational domains, which often makes standard mesh generation techniques impractical and, in
turn, poses severe challenges to grid‐based numerical methods for partial differential equations. These
complex fluid/structure interaction problems will be attacked by means of new immersed boundary and
embedded discontinuity methods, in which the fluid and solid domains are discretized using non‐
matching grids. Specifically, the variational structure of the finite element methods for discontinuous
approximations will be used to design new embedded discontinuity methods of enhanced accuracy and
robustness. At the same time, connections between finite element methods and modern finite volume
or finite difference methods will be exploited to obtain more general computational strategies. This
research aims at developing a framework for large‐scale computations in complex geometry and
ultimately delivering a new class of exascale‐ready computational algorithms.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
34
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Probing Coherent States of Light and Matter in Two‐Dimensional Semiconductors
Dr. Nathaniel P. Stern, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
Hybrid quantum systems integrating light with matter offer a highly‐controllable landscape for
understanding the interface between disparate physical entities. The ability to enhance light‐matter
interactions using engineered optical environments is well‐established in micro‐ and nano‐photonics,
but this capability has not yet been exploited for coherent phenomena in emerging two‐dimensional
semiconductor materials despite their rich correlations between spin, momentum, and light. The goal of
this research is to explore quasi‐particles of light and matter in monolayer semiconductors by harnessing
their intrinsic helicity sensitivity. Combining optical and electrical techniques originating in several
disciplines, the work will extend probes of coherent phenomena in two‐dimensional materials to
provide insights into low‐dimensional confinement, material synthesis, and superpositions of
degenerate valley excitations. These achievements will be important first steps toward manipulating
coherent excitations in low‐dimensional materials, which may prove critical for new capabilities in
quantum photonic technologies that exploit the valley degree of freedom.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
35
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Testing the Standard Model and Fundamental Symmetries in Nuclear Physics with Lattice QCD and
Effective Field Theory
Dr. André Walker‐Loud, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
The College of William and Mary
Williamsburg, VA 23187
The matter in the Universe is made almost entirely of protons, neutrons and the atomic nuclei
they form. These strongly interacting particles are described by Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
fundamental theory of nuclear interactions that comprises a cornerstone of the Standard Model of
Particle Physics. This theory describes our terrestrial experiments with remarkable accuracy, yet there is
very compelling evidence it is not complete: for example, the matter in the Universe, described by the
Standard Model, makes up a mere 4% of the energy budget of the Universe. The studies supported by
this award will provide basic input aimed at supporting potentially high‐impact nuclear physics
experiments probing the limits of the Standard Model and its fundamental symmetries as realized in
nuclear systems. This will be accomplished by combining lattice QCD calculations, from which one can
compute low‐energy properties of protons, neutrons and light nuclei, resulting from the Standard Model
and its possible extensions, with effective field theory, which is both necessary to interpret some of the
lattice calculations and also helps build a connection between the lattice QCD results and more complex
nuclear physics observables. This work will provide input for the interpretation of the following: (A) the
manifestation of parity violation in nuclear and hadronic systems: Parity is a conserved symmetry of all
the interactions in the Standard Model except for the elusive weak interactions. The fundamental parity
violating (neutral) weak current will be probed by ever more sensitive experiments at the Spallation
Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. (B) the elastic scattering of dark matter particles off
nuclei in large underground detectors: Dark Matter comprises about 85% of the mass of the Universe
(~25% of its energy budget) as determined through observations of the cosmos, yet we know very little
about it. In order to constrain these direct experimental searches, we must understand how potential
dark matter particles will interact with nucleons and nuclei. (C) future searches for permanent electric
dipole moments of nucleons and nuclei: An observation of a permanent electric dipole moment will help
us understand the observed matter‐antimatter asymmetry; why is the Universe made of only matter?
Searches for electric dipole moments remain one of the most powerful methods for constraining physics
beyond the Standard Model.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
36
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Visualizing and Controlling Energy Excitation and Transport in Mesoscale Organic and Inorganic
Material Composites
Dr. Alexander Weber‐Bargioni, Imaging and Manipulation Facility
Molecular Foundry
Material Science Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
The processes of creating energy from light in matter have been investigated since the advent of
quantum mechanics. However, a lack of spatial resolution has limited any study of the propagation of
excitons ‐ electron/hole pairs that enable energy transport through matter. The energy efficiency of
future devices relies on the understanding of this transport of energy from its point of origin at the
molecular level to mesoscopic, microscopic and macroscopic distances where it can be harnessed. The
objective of this research is to visualize, understand and control the transport processes of excitons
through novel nano building block composites with molecular precision. Unique, state‐of‐the‐art near‐
field optical microscopy and Localized Exciton Diffusion Microscopy were developed to map exciton
transport at the native length scale through organic and inorganic semiconducting nano building block
assemblies. Fundamental insight into energy propagation has profound implications for next generation
light harvesting and emitting materials, artificial photosynthesis, and the creation of novel
optoelectronic material functionalities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
37
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2014
Design of Efficient Molecular Electrocatalysts for Water and Carbon Dioxide Reduction Using
Predictive Models of Thermodynamic Properties
Dr. Jenny Y. Yang, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
The proposed research focuses on developing catalysts that can perform the reduction of water
to hydrogen and of carbon dioxide to formate using an electrochemical potential. Both products can be
used directly as an energy carrier in fuel cells or to generate more saturated chemical fuels. Formate is
also an intermediate in the sequential reduction of carbon dioxide to methanol, another useful chemical
fuel. Molecular inorganic complexes provide an opportunity to use electronic and steric ligand effects to
optimize the critical thermodynamic parameters in catalytic intermediates. These parameters will be
systematically measured for a series of abundant metal complexes to form predictive models for metal
and ligand electronic effects. This principle will be applied to the design of aqueous homogeneous
catalysts for the reduction of water and carbon dioxide optimized to function at specific pH ranges. The
thermodynamic properties measured will also be broadly applicable to other reductive reactions for the
production and utilization of chemical fuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
38
