DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Topological Materials with Complex Long‐Range Order
Dr. James G. Analytis, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
The objective of this research is to study exotic metallic behavior in frustrated quantum
magnets. These materials are closely associated with quantum spin liquids, an exotic state of matter
characterized by strong quantum entanglement. Such systems will in general form complex ordered
ground states that involve multiple broken symmetries including time‐reversal, inversion and
translational symmetry. Metallic states that coexist in this complex magnetic background are thought to
inherit some of the characteristics of these ground states, leading to novel transport phenomena that
can be sensitively tuned by external stimuli such as applied magnetic, electric and strain fields. This
works seeks to understand and manipulate the properties of these exotic materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
1
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Probing Ion Solvation and Charge Transfer at Electrochemical Interfaces Using Nonlinear Soft X Ray
Spectroscopy
Dr. Lawrence R. Baker, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
Direct observation of ion solvation and charge transfer at electrode–electrolyte interfaces will
provide important new understanding of the physical processes that determine the efficiency of
electrochemical energy conversion and storage. This project will use 2‐wave mixing of a soft x‐ray pulse
created by high harmonic generation (HHG) with an optical laser pulse to probe ion coordination
geometry and charge transfer at working electrode surfaces. Soft x‐ray sum frequency generation (SFG)
will be applied to the study of ion solvation at biased electrode interfaces as well as metal oxide
electrodes used as catalysts for water oxidation. Here, soft x‐ray SFG will be used to determine the
state‐specific charge donor level in electrochemical catalysts that mediate the kinetics of hole transfer
during the water oxidation reaction. In addition, soft x‐ray SFG will be used to investigate the
mechanism of ion de‐solvation and adsorption at biased electrode surfaces. The ability to observe
electrochemical interfaces directly with element specificity and chemical state resolution will provide
new insight into the mechanisms of electrochemical catalysis and will inform the design of new
materials for high efficiency applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
2
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Coherent Neutrino‐Nucleus Scattering: A Tool to Search for New Physics
Dr. Phillip S. Barbeau, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
At first blush, the fundamental particle that we call the neutrino does not interact with anything,
does not weigh anything, and cannot be observed. Predicted in 1930 to explain the apparent violation in
nuclear beta decay of the very basic physics precept of energy conservation, the neutrino eluded
detection for over two decades. The “little neutral one,” as Enrico Fermi named it, can be difficult to
work with but has traditionally offered vistas to a better understanding of the physical world. The
coherent scattering of neutrinos off nuclei is one such vista. Predicted over 40 years ago, it has long
been one of the “hard” problems in neutrino physics. The daunting technological challenge and the
dearth of suitable sources of neutrinos has so far stymied efforts to see this process. The situation is
rapidly changing with new developments in detector technologies and with the construction of the
Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) in Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The COHERENT collaboration has
recently endeavored to measure this process for the first time at the SNS. A precision measurement of
coherent neutrino scattering can test for extensions to current models of the weak force; it is a sensitive
test for large neutrino magnetic moments which can arise in theories with large extra dimensions; it can
investigate the dependence of the interaction of the neutrino on different types of quarks; and it is
perhaps the most natural way to search for sterile neutrinos, a flavor of neutrino which may be even
more weakly interacting than its cousins. An elegant and simple detector concept will be developed that
incorporates numerous nuclear targets as swappable, low‐threshold, kilogram‐scale gas ionization
detectors. The detectors provide for a robust, systematically clean and information rich suite of
experiments. Coherent neutrino‐nucleus scattering is a long awaited tool that will enable sensitive
searches for fundamental particle physics beyond our current understanding.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
3
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Multiscale Dynamics of Reactive Fronts in the Subsurface
Dr. Ilenia Battiato, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
San Diego State University
San Diego, CA 92182
Carbon dioxide (CO ) sequestration is considered one of the potential carbon capture and
2
storage technologies for controlling and stabilizing atmospheric carbon emissions by trapping CO in
2
geologic formations for thousands of years. Yet, geologic storage still poses great uncertainty in terms of
quantifying and predicting future CO migration and potential leakages. Such difficulty arises because
2
subsurface flow and reactive transport take place in complex heterogeneous media and pervasively
exhibit non‐linear dynamics and lack of temporal and spatial scale separation. For example, acidification
reactions at the pore‐scale can dramatically modify permeability of the host rock at the field scale. The
overreaching goals of the research are to develop a multi‐scale physics‐based framework to understand
and predict permeability changes in host rocks due to CO injection over a multiplicity of temporal and
2
spatial scales. This will be achieved through a combination of analytical, computational and
experimental tools, including homogenization techniques, multi‐scale numerical methods and
microfluidic experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
4
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Leveraging the Higgs to Discover Physics Beyond the Standard Model
Dr. Nathaniel J. Craig, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
The discovery of a Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) heralds a new era in particle
physics. The Higgs discovery not only marks the completion of the Standard Model framework but also
offers numerous opportunities in the search for more fundamental physics underlying the Standard
Model. For example, the Higgs boson raises a pressing theoretical problem known as the hierarchy
problem: why is an elementary scalar particle so light when quantum corrections tie its mass to the
highest energy scales? The Higgs also provides an unprecedented experimental opportunity as a
bellwether of new physics: it may be merely the first of several Higgs bosons, while its production and
decays may provide unique evidence for additional particles. This research program leverages the Higgs
boson to explore new physics from both directions, developing novel approaches to solving the
hierarchy problem posed by the Higgs boson and directly employing the Higgs as a new tool for
discovery. Solutions to the hierarchy problem predict new particles around the same energy scale as the
Higgs boson, but existing proposals are under increasing pressure from null results at the LHC and other
experiments. This project pursues original solutions to the hierarchy problem wherein the new particles
protecting the Higgs boson from quantum corrections are neutral under the Standard Model and
present unique signatures at the LHC. These theories motivate the existence of new particles and
interactions in additional hidden sectors that can be probed across the energy, intensity, and cosmic
frontiers. In employing the Higgs as a tool for discovery, this work articulates a systematic approach to
searching for additional Higgs bosons at the LHC. It also strengthens the search for new physics by using
the recently‐discovered Higgs as a direct probe of new physics processes; as an indirect probe through
its couplings; as a portal to states neutral under the Standard Model; and as a source of exotic
processes. By using the Higgs in diverse ways to explore the structure of physics beyond the Standard
Model, this research aims to understand how the universe works at its most fundamental level.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
5
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Determining Astrophysical Reaction Rates for Classical Novae and X‐ray Bursts via Indirect Methods
Dr. Catherine M. Deibel, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics & Astronomy
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Classical novae and Type I X‐ray bursts are the most common stellar explosions in the Galaxy.
Both occur in binary star systems where hydrogen‐rich matter from a companion star is accreted onto
the surface of a white dwarf or neutron star, respectively. As matter builds up on the surface, pressure
and density increase, leading to a rise in temperature that triggers a thermonuclear runaway on the
surface of the accreting star. During these thermonuclear explosions, proton‐rich nuclei are synthesized
via a series of charged‐particle capture reactions, which are dominated by resonances. As many of these
reactions involve unstable nuclei, the reaction rates can be difficult, if not impossible, to measure
directly using current technology. Rates must therefore be calculated by indirect means using
experimentally determined nuclear structure properties of these resonances. Specifically, the properties
of resonances for some of the most uncertain reactions in novae and X‐ray bursts, such as those
involving 26Al and 20Na, will be measured through this research. The experimental work will rely on state‐
of‐the‐art techniques for nuclear spectroscopy using both stable and radioactive ion beams at the John
D. Fox Accelerator Laboratory at Florida State University and the Argonne Tandem Linac Accelerator
System facility at Argonne National Laboratory. Using these data, important reaction rates will be
calculated accurately for the first time, eliminating key uncertainties in understanding classical novae
and X‐ray bursts.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
6
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Active Impurity Control For Maximum Fusion Performance
Dr. Luis F. Delgado‐Aparicio, Staff Research Physicist
Experimental Division
NSTX‐U and ITER & Tokamaks Departments
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
Princeton, NJ 08540
Achieving the highest possible value of fusion power for a prolonged duration enhances the
economic feasibility of a fusion power plant using magnetic confinement. Success of the ITER tokamak
experiment and other future facilities relies on the attainment and sustainment of a long pulse, high
confinement operating regime that also maximizes plasma purity and hence fusion power production.
Controlling the accumulation of impurities in the core of a fusion plasma to maximize plasma purity is
thus crucial for optimizing fusion power performance, especially in the presence of high‐Z components
in contact with the plasma. The development of an active feedback control system to minimize high‐Z
impurity content is pivotal to extending our experimental capabilities from our current experience with
low‐Z carbon walls, lithium coatings and short‐lived boron films. The objective of this research is to
develop an integrated real‐time active control approach aimed at achieving long‐pulse tokamak plasma
discharges with reduced fuel dilution and lower radiative losses in the core while avoiding the formation
of deleterious radiation induced instabilities. A unique soft x‐ray detector with appropriate time, space
and energy resolution will be assembled and deployed on the National Spherical Torus Experiment
Upgrade (NSTX‐U) to track impurity content. The output of the detector will be used to control various
actuators to flush impurities from the hot plasma. Comprehensive impurity transport measurements
and validated physical models describing plasma transport and instabilities in the core of fusion
experiments will strengthen the physics basis of operation for ITER and beyond.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
7
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Resilience Design Patterns: A Structured Approach to Resilience at Extreme Scale
Dr. Christian Engelmann, Research and Development Staff Member
Computer Science Research Group
Computer Science and Mathematics Division
Computing and Computational Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Extreme‐scale, high‐performance computing (HPC) will significantly advance discovery in
fundamental scientific processes by enabling multiscale simulations that range from the very small, on
quantum and atomic scales, to the very large, on planetary and cosmological scales. Computing at scales
in the hundreds of petaflops, exaflops, and beyond will also lend a competitive advantage to the US
energy and industrial sectors by providing the computing power for rapid design and prototyping and
big data analysis. Yet, to build and effectively operate extreme‐scale HPC systems, the U.S. Department
of Energy cites several key challenges, including resilience, defined as efficient and correct operation
despite the occurrence of faults or defects in system components that can cause errors. These
innovative systems require equally innovative components designed to communicate and compute at
unprecedented rates, scales, and levels of complexity, increasing the probability for hardware and
software faults. This research project offers a structured hardware and software design approach for
improving resilience in extreme‐scale HPC systems so that scientific applications running on these
systems generate accurate solutions in a timely and efficient manner. Frequently used in computer
engineering, design patterns identify problems and provide generalized solutions through reusable
templates. Using a novel resilience design pattern concept, this project identifies and evaluates
repeatedly occurring resilience problems and coordinates solutions throughout hardware and software
components in HPC systems. This effort will create comprehensive methods and metrics by which
system vendors and computing centers can establish mechanisms and interfaces to coordinate flexible
fault management across hardware and software components and optimize the cost‐benefit trade‐offs
among performance, resilience, and power consumption. Reusable programming templates of these
patterns will offer resilience portability across different HPC system architectures and permit design
space exploration and adaptation to different design trade‐offs.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
8
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Nanostructured, Targeted Layered Metal Oxides as Active and Selective Heterogeneous
Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution
Dr. Eranda Nikolla, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI 48202
A long‐standing goal in heterogeneous catalysis is to develop catalysts with targeted surface
functionality and high uniformity. Recent advances combining novel synthetic chemistry, advanced
characterization techniques, and the predictive power of theoretical calculations have led to the
development of metal‐based heterogeneous catalysts with controlled surface structure and morphology
that results in high activity and selectivity for chemical reactions. However, control over the structure
and morphology of complex metal oxide‐based heterogeneous catalysts (such as perovskites and
nickelates) remains significantly more challenging. This project focuses on a promising class of complex
layered oxide catalysts, known as nickelate oxides with high potential for efficiently catalyzing reactions
involving oxygen, such as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). OER is an important electrochemical
reaction that governs the performance of technologically relevant energy processes such as
electrochemical water splitting for hydrogen production. The objective of this research is to tune the
geometric and chemical properties of layered nickelate oxides to obtain highly active and stable non‐
noble metal based electrocatalysts for OER. This will be achieved using insights from quantum density
functional theory calculations to guide the selective synthesis of nickelate oxides with optimal activity
and stability for OER. This work will facilitate the design of non‐noble metal based catalysts for energy
conversion and storage.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
9
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Assessing Subtle Variations in the Actinyl Oxo Reactivity through Characterization of Neptunyl
Complexes
Dr. Tori Z. Forbes, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242
The neptunyl cation, [Np(V,VI)O2]n+ (n = 1,2), is a byproduct of the nuclear fuel cycle and has
unique chemical properties not observed elsewhere on the periodic table. Interaction between the
neptunyl cation and neighboring molecules in solution is a basic chemical process that impacts
radiochemical separations, corrosion of spent fuel, and environmental transport. Currently this process
is poorly understood; thus, there is a critical need to understand the overarching chemical components
that influence actinyl oxo chemistry. The objective of this research is to determine the fundamental
mechanisms that can influence the intermolecular interactions occurring between neptunyl cations and
neighboring species. The overall hypothesis of the research is that these intermolecular attractions are
primarily controlled by the electronic properties of the neptunyl cation but can be further influenced by
the electron‐donating properties of the equatorial ligands. Insights gained from these studies could lead
to technological advances in separations and environmental remediation. This research will lead to an
enhanced structural and spectroscopic understanding of the intermolecular interactions of the neptunyl
cation thorugh the characterization of novel molecular complexes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
10
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Functional Characterization and Regulatory Modeling of Lignocellulose Deconstruction in the
Saprophytic Bacterium Cellvibrio Japonicus
Dr. Jeffrey G. Gardner, Assistant Professor
Department of Biological Sciences
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD 21250
The degradation of plant biomass (lignocellulose) is a critical component of global carbon cycling
and renewable energy production. Every year, microorganisms in the environment degrade one
hundred billion tons of plant biomass. These microorganisms have found effective ways to completely
break down plant biomass and use it for energy. This process is very efficient because the
microorganisms in the environment produce large numbers of enzymes that can degrade lignocellulose.
While some of the mechanisms of lignocellulose breakdown are understood, which enzymes are
essential to plant biomass degradation and how their production is regulated is less known. There is
little understanding of how plant biomass degradation is regulated in bacteria because it is not known
how these microorganisms are able to detect plant biomass as a nutrient source. This project will use
the plant biomass‐degrading bacterium Cellvibrio japonicus to address these questions. Using next‐
generation DNA sequencing technologies, this research will determine what enzymes are highly
produced when C. japonicus is degrading lignocellulose. This information will direct additional
experiments to identify the essential enzymes for plant biomass degradation and will compare the
enzymes that C. japonicus produces to those currently used for biofuel production. Finally, by
understanding how C. japonicus is able to effectively degrade plant biomass, this project will create a
model of how microorganisms in the environment are able to detect lignocellulose as a nutrient. The
knowledge obtained from this research will help develop biotechnology strategies to enhance the
economical production of biofuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
11
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Cross‐Scale Land‐Atmosphere Experiment (CSLAEX)
Dr. Pierre Gentine, Assistant Professor
Department of Earth and Environmental Engineering
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
It is now well recognized that land‐atmosphere interactions play an important role in both
weather and climate prediction. These interactions take place over a wide range of spatial and temporal
scales. Most current formulations of surface turbulent exchange of momentum, heat and moisture are
informed by observations with a limited temporal and spatial scale and hence may have limited
applicability. The objective of this work is to improve the multi‐scale representation of the near‐surface
heat exchange using observations based on high‐frequency fiber optic cables. Our knowledge and
predictive capacity in land‐atmosphere coupling is limited by our ability to observe the full‐scale
spectrum in action. The first long‐term Cross‐Scale Land‐Atmosphere Experiment (CSLAEX) will bridge
this fundamental gap in observation capacity by measuring components of the surface energy balance at
a spatial scale relevant to meteorological applications and remote sensing (~2 kilometers) along with
recording observations of the nested subscale processes using fiber optic measurements based on novel
Distributed Temperature Sensors (DTS) at 20‐centimeter spatial resolution and 1‐Hertz temporal
frequency. The CSLAEX experiment will be deployed at the Department of Energy’s (DOE) Atmospheric
Radiation Measurement (ARM) Southern Great Plains (SGP) site near Lamont, Oklahoma. The data
recorded from the Surface Energy Balance and simultaneous observations of the atmospheric state
(boundary layer, cloud, convection) available at the DOE ARM SGP site will be used to frame and
evaluate new transport laws and parameterizations for the boundary layer and the land surface that can
then be implemented into the Weather and Research Forecasting (WRF) model and Community
Atmospheric Model (CAM). The results of this study will impact multiple fields including meteorology,
climate, hydrology and remote sensing.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
12
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Actinide Materials under Extreme Conditions
Dr. Krzysztof Gofryk, Staff Scientist
Fuel Design and Development Department
Nuclear Fuels and Materials Division
Idaho National Laboratory
Idaho Falls, ID 83415
Nearly 20% of the world's electricity today is generated by nuclear energy. However, the
microscopic processes that control transport and thermodynamic behaviors in actinide materials used in
power plants are not well understood. Key to understanding phonon, spin and charge transport in
actinide materials is a knowledge of the coupling between lattice vibrations, spins and carriers and how
the coupling of the low‐energy excitations is represented in important physical properties. These
interactions will be probed by extensive transport, thermodynamic, and spectroscopic measurements
performed under extreme conditions such as high pressures, low temperatures and very high magnetic
fields. The characteristic responses of these materials to extreme experimental conditions will help
elucidate the underlying transport mechanisms and provide decisive data for theoretical models. This
new information and the advances will also have broad implications across actinide materials science
generally.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
13
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Photoconversion in Disordered Semiconductors: Spatial, Spectral, and Temporal Insights through
Nonlinear Microscopy
Dr. Erik M. Grumstrup, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry
Montana State University
Bozeman, MT 59717
Solar energy transduction in the disordered compositions of organic and hybrid
inorganic/organic solar cells emerges from the interplay of events in the nanoscale and mesoscale
domains. It is therefore important to interrogate these power conversion systems at the local level,
where structural and compositional heterogeneity can be correlated precisely with the variation in solar
cell functionality. Utilizing ultrafast laser spectroscopy coupled together with optical microscopy, this
project will examine how excited states and free charges evolve spatially and energetically on length
scales between 10 nanometers and 10 microns and on timescales from 50 femtoseconds to 50
microseconds. Conversion of solar photons to useable energy in a photovoltaic system requires two
processes to occur successfully. The initial photoexcited state must efficiently produce electrons that are
free to move, and the electrons must be transported to electrical contacts before excess energy is lost
as heat. The focus of this project examines the spatial and energetic dynamics of these two primary
events of photoconversion in blended organic materials and organic‐inorganic hybrids. The electronic
properties of these systems are complex, involving defects, interfaces, and trap sites, and are strongly
influenced by the cumulative interaction of local morphology and composition. Insights gained from
measurements made on these characteristic length and time scales will provide an understanding of
how nanoscale and mesoscale properties control the macroscopic performance of disordered
photovoltaic systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
14
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Universality in Quantum Gravity
Dr. Thomas Hartman, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
Quantum mechanics and general relativity, two pillars of modern physics, have yet to be
reconciled. Theoretical advances in string theory and related subjects over the last two decades indicate
that this can be achieved if we abandon the assumption that space and time are fundamental. Instead,
spacetime is an approximation that emerges only at long enough distances, and it must be replaced at
short distances by a very large number of microscopic constituents. This idea, known as holography or
emergent gravity, is supported by numerous calculations, but the underlying mechanism remains poorly
understood. Furthermore, although emergent gravity is suspected to be a generic feature of a wide class
of quantum theories, little is known about what defines this class of theories, or whether all such
theories are string theories. The goals of this research are to understand how general relativity emerges
at long distances and to identify the class of the quantum field theories that exhibit this phenomenon.
New techniques will be developed to analyze quantum systems with many degrees of freedom, high
energy density, and strong entanglement. These techniques will be applied to the dynamics of black
holes and other gravitating systems. Progress in these areas would be a significant step toward resolving
longstanding questions in quantum gravity, including Hawking’s black hole information paradox, the
uniqueness of string theory, and the connection between gravity and thermodynamics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
15
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Hybrid Methods for Complex Particle Systems
Dr. Cory D. Hauck, Research and Development Staff Member
Computational and Applied Mathematics Group
Computer Science and Mathematics Division
Computing and Computational Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
This project is focused on the development of hybrid, hierarchical, and multilevel algorithms for
the simulation of complex many‐particle systems. Such systems are key components in a variety of
energy generation and energy storage devices. The proposed research is relevant to the computational
study of gas‐dynamics, plasmas, multiphase flows, and charge transport in materials. The computational
complexity of particle system simulations stems from the large numbers of unknowns and the large
variations in the spatial and temporal scales over which the systems evolve. This multiscale, multiphysics
research challenge will be addressed by hybrid methods that leverage simplified or reduced models to
increase the efficiency of simulations so that computational resources can be effectively applied to
resolve important fine scale features. This effort relies on the central role played by mean‐field models
from kinetic theory, which can capture non‐equilibrium behavior and also approximate detailed
information about particle correlations stochastically via collision operators. The first goal of this project
is to connect the fluid and kinetic descriptions in a single efficient algorithm for attacking multiscale
problems. The second goal is to improve the efficiency of molecular dynamics solvers using the mean‐
field solution of the kinetic model as a first approximation.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
16
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Combined Capture and Conversion of CO
2
Dr. David J. Heldebrant, Senior Research Scientist
Applied Materials & Performance Group
Energy Processes and Materials Division
Energy & Environment Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99354
Energy‐efficient CO capture from post‐combustion exhaust streams is a formidable scientific
2
challenge as current state‐of‐the‐art technologies result in a 30% energy loss in coal‐fired power plants.
Tailored CO ‐capture solvents ‐ such as switchable ionic liquids (SWILs) ‐ hold the promise of significantly
2
reducing this energy penalty. Sizable gaps exist, however, in the fundamental understanding of the CO
2
capture mechanisms in SWILs. The unusual kinetic/thermodynamic behavior, not seen in other CO ‐
2
capture solvents, is likely related to changes in the SWIL's micro‐domain solvent structure. The goals of
this project are to use a combined experimental and theoretical approach to explore the structural
changes found in SWILs and determine how this structure impacts the SWIL's ability to separate and
convert CO into energy carrier molecules. Building on past work with SWILs, this project will conduct a
2
rigorous exploration of how to manipulate such molecular environments to enable energy‐efficient CO
2
capture and its subsequent catalytic conversion into practical energy carriers. Two synergistic thrusts
will be studied concurrently. The first will exploit combined experimental and theoretical studies to
determine the mechanism of liquid carboxylation (formation of alkylcarbonates when CO reacts with
2
the ionic liquid). The molecular reorganization in the SWIL solutions provides a platform to study how
the CO dissolution and complexation mechanisms change as a function of CO loading. Studies will
2 2
characterize the molecular reorganization to learn how the solvent's environmental reconfiguration
impacts the solvent characteristics that affect CO uptake. The second thrust is an experimental study to
2
determine the correlation between the electronic properties associated with mesoscopic SWIL structure
and the reactivity of the alkylcarbonate versus catalyst location within the SWIL ionic domain.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
17
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Rheo‐structural Spectroscopy: Fingerprinting the in situ Response of Fluids to Arbitrary Flow Fields
Dr. Matthew E. Helgeson, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Understanding how processing flows control nanoscale morphology is critical for designing soft
materials with enhanced properties for energy production and conversion. However, experimental
capabilities to directly measure and test such structure‐processing relationships are currently limited to
environments that produce pure shearing or elongational deformation. This research will develop a
fluidic device and associated experimental methodologies that enable a completely new capability – in
situ structural measurements using small angle neutron scattering (SANS) under arbitrarily variable
deformation type. Leveraging recent advances in time‐resolved neutron measurements, new capabilities
will be devised to probe nanoscale fluid structure and dynamics in complex, time‐varying flows that
emulate those encountered in real processes. This new tool will be combined with detailed
computational modeling to “fingerprint” a fluid’s microstructural response to arbitrary changes in
deformation, allowing its processing behavior and morphology to be directly predicted from its flow
history. This new tool will be employed to study two important classes of materials: polymeric fluids and
self‐assembled liquid crystals. Specifically, this research will examine how molecular conformation and
aggregate morphology are impacted by complex flows, and how these nanoscale phenomena underlie a
number of commonly observed flow instabilities. Ultimately, the goal is to provide detailed guidelines
for designing processing flows to obtain new or highly refined non‐equilibrium structures of soft matter.
The flow device developed in this work will be made available to the scientific community at national
neutron scattering facilities in hopes that it will become a central tool in studying flow‐structure
coupling in a wide range of complex fluids.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
18
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
CALORIE: A Constraint Language and Optimizing Runtime for Exascale Power Management
Dr. Henry C. Hoffmann, Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
Scientific discovery is reliant on computation for insight. The next generation of exascale
supercomputers will place tremendous computational power in the hands of scientists. That power,
however, comes at the cost of an unprecedented complexity of software development. This complexity
arises from the need to schedule myriad low‐level resources to meet high‐level application
requirements. Requiring scientists to be experts in both high‐level application constraints and low‐level
computing resources creates an unrealistic burden, delaying scientific insight. The objective of this
research is to create a new programming model that relieves this burden. In this model, scientific
application developers will directly express high‐level goals and constraints. System software will
support this model by automatically tuning low‐level computing resources to ensure that the goals and
constraints will be met. Using this model, scientists will focus on their area of expertise while the
burden of managing the complexity of exascale supercomputers will be automated, greatly increasing
productivity and the rate of new scientific insights.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
19
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Unraveling Principles for Targeted Band Structure Design Using High‐Throughput Computation with
Application to Thermoelectrics Materials Discovery
Dr. Anubhav Jain, Research Scientist / Chemist
Electrochemical Technologies Group
Energy Storage and Distributed Resources Division
Energy Technologies Area
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Many technological applications – including thermoelectrics, photovoltaics, solid state lighting,
and transparent conductors – would attain significantly higher performance and lower cost if one could
design materials that exhibit optimal electronic properties. For example, thermoelectric devices can
convert waste heat from industry and automotive exhaust into usable energy but have traditionally
been limited by low efficiency. This project will develop theoretical approaches based on density
functional theory calculations to screen for high figure‐of‐merit thermoelectric materials on a large scale
and in a multifaceted way. For the first time, band structure and electronic transport data on hundreds
of thousands of potential new thermoelectric materials will be generated. This large dataset will be used
to reverse‐engineer the factors that produce good performance. Novel methods to encode chemical,
structural, and electronic properties as meaningful structured data will feed into powerful machine‐
learning methods that uncover hidden structure‐property relationships, and specific features in the
band structure will be connected to details of atomic orbital interactions in the presence of secondary
environments. In parallel, joint computational‐experimental work will establish a framework for
synthesis and optimization, resulting in lab‐scale demonstration of a high figure‐of‐merit thermoelectric
candidate. This data‐driven paradigm of materials discovery will establish new strategies that make
possible the design of materials possessing atypical band structure features (e.g., compounds possessing
high mobility and high valley degeneracy) that are very difficult to predict or control by other methods.
These principles would serve as a foundational capability that could in the future be applied towards the
design of several types of semiconductor devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
20
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Mesoscale Fragments of Crystalline Silicon by Chemical Synthesis
Dr. Rebekka S. Klausen, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
The semiconductor silicon has revolutionized life in the last century, from the development of
computer chips to the discovery of solar cells that make telecommunication satellites possible. The
frontier for silicon research and development is at the mesoscale. The incredible potential of mesoscale
silicon arises from the properties it shares with bulk silicon – earth abundance and low precursor toxicity
– and the distinctive optoelectronic properties that emerge at small sizes. Fully exploring and developing
this essential energy‐relevant material demands absolute control over material length in all dimensions.
The goal of this research is to develop an innovative length‐controlled synthetic strategy enabling the
realization of structure‐dependent optoelectronic properties in silicon‐containing molecules and
polymers. Reflecting bulk silicon’s ubiquitous application, the materials that arise from these synthetic
studies will be broadly relevant to the energy sciences with the potential to serve as functional
components of solar cells, light‐emitting devices, and energy storage materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
21
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Interactions between Surface Chemistry and Gas‐Phase Combustion: New Optical Tools for Probing
Flame‐Wall Interactions and the Heterogeneous Chemistry of Soot Growth and Oxidation in Flames
Dr. Christopher J. Kliewer, Principal Member of the Technical Staff
Combustion Chemistry and Diagnostics Department
Transportation Energy Center
Sandia National Laboratories
Livermore, CA 94550
Some of the most stubborn and technologically critical problems in combustion are dominated
by heterogeneous processes. While purely gas‐phase combustion systems have been the subject of
intense theoretical and experimental study, combustion phenomena occurring at interfaces are far less
understood. This is partly caused by the lack of experimental approaches capable of probing locations
very close to an interface, especially in the hostile environment of combustion. The aim of this project is
to develop and use the needed optical diagnostic tools to study two classes of the most important
combustion processes that are inherently entangled with surface‐mediated chemistry. The first topic of
study is that of soot particle growth and oxidation in flames. While many experimental techniques have
been developed for studying soot particles collected from flames, these are nearly universally ex‐situ
analysis techniques. Nonlinear optical probes will be developed that are both noninvasive to the
combustion process and capable of capturing the surface chemistry of soot growth and oxidation in the
act. The second target of study utilizing the developed optical toolset is that of a combusting flow
interacting with a metal wall‐ a ubiquitous situation for combustion devices and burners. Flame‐wall
interactions are a major source for pollutant emissions, such as unburned hydrocarbon and particulate
emissions, as well as a major cause for combustion device ageing and failure. A new
femtosecond/picosecond nonlinear sum‐frequency generation vibrational spectroscopy scattering
technique will also be developed and employed in the soot surface chemistry and flame‐wall interaction
studies. This optical diagnostic is selective to probing just the molecular monolayers near an interface.
These methods will be combined with multidimensional coherent hyperspectral imaging to define the
boundary conditions such as gas‐phase temperature and species concentrations. Ultimately, the new
insights into the chemical mechanisms of flame‐wall interactions and soot growth and oxidation will
inform combustion chemistry models that increase the fidelity of predictive numerical simulations of
combustion devices, chemistry, and processes. In turn, this will lead to reduced pollutant formation,
such as soot and unburned hydrocarbons, in practical devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
22
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Non‐Collinear Magnetism and Dynamic Effects in Dzyaloshinskii‐Moriya Magnets
Dr. Alexey Kovalev, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Nebraska
Lincoln, NE 68588
The objective of this project is to understand the effect of spin‐orbit interactions in mesoscale
and nanoscale magnetic systems. Spin‐orbit interactions are usually described by the Dzyaloshinskii‐
Moriya (DM) interaction. These magnetic systems exhibit fascinating physics related to the formation of
topological objects such as skyrmions, magnetization dynamics, and phase transitions. The objectives of
this project are to: (1) understand effects of DM interactions on spin/energy transport phenomena and
magnetic order dynamics in systems with and without magnetic textures such as domain walls, magnetic
vortices, and skyrmions by developing a hydrodynamic description combined with diagrammatic and
linear response approaches; (2) understand dynamic effects in the context of novel emergent phases in
magnets with DM interactions; and (3) assess the feasibility of novel ultra‐low‐power spintronic devices
that combine logic and memory functionalities by employing theoretical descriptions of spin and energy
currents and their interplay with magnetic order dynamics. The project will combine analytic and
numerical components to study the properties of various phases as well as the time dependent
response to applied fields.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
23
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Elucidating Biological Energy Transduction from Ammonia
Dr. Kyle M. Lancaster, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
While most organisms metabolize carbon‐based chemical fuel, a select few organisms evolved
to derive sufficient biological energy from the six‐electron aerobic oxidation of ammonia to nitrite. This
process, referred to as nitrification, involves two remarkable steps. The first is the hydroxylation of
ammonia by the enzyme ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) to form hydroxylamine. AMO uses a copper
cofactor to activate the strong N–H bond of ammonia using dioxygen as the oxidant. The second step
involves the oxidation of hydroxylamine to nitrite by hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO). The
oxidation of hydroxylamine to nitrite by HAO is a four‐electron process requiring proton management.
HAO uses a heme cofactor, heme P460, which is unique in its ability to directly remove electrons from
substrate bound to its iron center. Mastering the fundamental chemical principles underlying these
reactions will fuel the development of novel catalysts for small molecule activation and selective,
proton‐coupled redox transformations. Moreover, mechanistic knowledge of AMO and HAO will spur
the development of improved nitrification inhibitors that would alleviate economic and ecological
burdens resulting from the nitrification of nitrogenous fertilizer. However, molecular level
understanding of the mechanisms involved in nitrification has remained elusive. This is partly due to the
difficulty of isolating sufficient quantities of AMO and HAO from nitrifying bacteria and archaea, which
are slow‐growing microbes that achieve low cell densities. This project describes the use of stopped‐
flow kinetics to study the reaction mechanisms underlying the step‐wise oxidation of ammonia to
nitrite. These experiments will be complemented by cutting‐edge, synchrotron‐based high‐resolution X‐
ray spectroscopies that will be used to characterize the resting states and reactive intermediates of
AMO and HAO. These studies will leverage our newly developed recombinant expression system for
AMO that uses rapidly proliferating bacteria to produce active protein in quantities sufficient for
biophysical characterization.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
24
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Precision Probes of the Strong Interaction
Dr. Christopher Lee, Staff Scientist
Nuclear and Particle Physics, Astrophysics and Cosmology Group, T‐2
Theoretical Division
Theory, Simulation, and Computation Directorate
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM 87544
At the heart of all ordinary matter lie the protons and neutrons (hadrons), dynamic
conglomerates of quarks and gluons (partons) bound together by the strong interaction, described by
the well‐established theory of Quantum Chromodynamics. Yet there remain some basic puzzles to be
explained. Among these are the detailed structure of the proton in terms of its partonic constituents
and how the partons' angular momentum adds up to the total proton spin; the precise value of the
strong coupling that sets the size of the strong interaction, for which a number of existing
determinations are in tension; and the precise effect of nonperturbative hadronization (binding of
partons) on strong interaction cross sections. This research will develop and apply the powerful tools of
effective field theory aimed at high precision understanding of these phenomena. The project will focus
especially on hadronic jet cross sections in electron‐proton and proton‐proton collisions that are
sensitive to the strong coupling, to hadronization, and to the details of parton distributions inside
protons. This work brings the power of the modern Soft Collinear Effective Theory (SCET) into the arena
of medium‐to‐high‐energy nuclear physics being pursued at the U.S. experimental frontier at facilities
such as Fermilab, the Relativistic Heavy‐Ion Collider, Jefferson Lab, and the planned Electron‐Ion Collider
as well as the Large Hadron Collider in Europe. SCET makes possible the factorization of physics at widely
separated energy scales in hadronic cross sections, the resummation of perturbative predictions for
them to high accuracy, and the identification of universal nonperturbative effects across different
observables. Reaching new levels of accuracy and precision in these theoretical predictions will lead to
new and more precise extractions of the strong coupling and parton distributions that reveal the inner
structure of the proton.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
25
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Study of Heavy Flavor Mesons and Flavor‐Tagged Jets with the CMS Detector
Dr. Yen‐Jie Lee, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
In relativistic heavy ion collisions, a new form of matter consisting of liberated quarks and
gluons, the Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP), is predicted by Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) calculations.
This strongly interacting matter, first discovered at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), was found
to flow more freely than any other known fluid. One typical way to study a new medium of interest is to
understand the passage of particles through it. However, studies of this kind are very difficult because
the QGP created in the collider lasts for just yoctoseconds (10‐24 seconds). To overcome this difficulty,
one studies heavy ion collisions, which produce not only the QGP but also energetic gluons and quarks.
Those high energy probes then lose energy by radiating gluons or by colliding with the other quarks and
gluons as they traverse through the QGP medium. This sizable in‐medium energy loss, observed as the
suppression of high energy particles at RHIC or the attenuation of quark and gluon jets at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC), shows that the stopping power of the QGP is incredibly strong. Models based on
QCD predict that the gluons, which carry larger color charge, lose more energy than quarks. At the same
kinematic energy, the heavy quarks, which are moving more slowly than the light quarks, are expected
to radiate less energy than the light quarks. Due to their smaller in‐medium radiative energy loss, heavy
quarks are ideal tools for the study of energy loss though elastic scatterings in the QGP. This research
program will fully exploit the capability of the Compact Muon Solenoid detector at the LHC and utilize
new means of selecting interesting events to collect high statistics data on heavy quarks in heavy ion
collisions. The program of heavy quark data analysis will aim to provide important information on the
elastic scattering power of the QGP to test theoretical calculations based on QCD and models connected
to quantum gravity and string theory.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
26
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
In Situ TEM Study of Branched Nanocrystal Growth Mechanisms: Understanding Non‐Classical
Processes Controlling Formation of Hierarchical Nanostructures
Dr. Dongsheng Li, Research Scientist
Materials Sciences Group
Physical Sciences Division
Fundamental & Computational Sciences Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99354
The objective of this project is to develop an understanding of the formation mechanisms that
determine nanocrystal size and morphology to enable the design of highly branched nanomaterials with
controlled physical and chemical properties. The new morphologies and tailored properties enabled by
that knowledge will accelerate the use of nanocrystalline materials in energy storage, photovoltaic,
catalytic, and photonic applications. Branched nanowires are of great interest for these applications
because their high surface areas, small dimensions, and complex geometries provide unique control
over chemical reactivity, transport of electrons, and absorption of light. However, the ability to design
and synthesize these materials is limited because no quantitative framework exists to describe the
formation mechanisms, which are typically distinct from the well‐described classical mechanisms
responsible for bulk crystal growth. These "non‐classical" processes are known to involve the assembly
of molecular clusters, dense liquid droplets, and nanocrystals. Development of a predictive
understanding of these mechanisms requires data on the dynamics of nanocrystal formation as it
happens ‐ rather than just information about the nanocrystals after they are formed. This work will
employ in situ transmission electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy, which provide direct
observation of atomic structure and its evolution under actual conditions of synthesis, to investigate the
movement and assembly of the precursors that are key elements in the synthesis of these
nanostructures. These phenomena will be correlated with the surface charge of the precursors as well
as the orientation‐dependent forces between them. This approach will be applied to TiO and PbS
2
branched nanowires, which are believed to form through two distinct but general classes of non‐
classical crystal growth processes. These studies will fill a void in our knowledge of the principles
underlying these two fundamental processes that govern synthesis of a broad range of nanomaterials.
Moreover, developing an understanding of the principles underlying formation of complex
nanomaterials addresses the grand challenge of achieving atom‐ and energy‐efficient synthesis of
revolutionary new forms of matter with tailored properties.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
27
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Understanding Topological Pseudospin Transport in van der Waals' Materials
Dr. Kin Fai Mak, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
Because of symmetry, crystals often have degenerate valleys in the conduction or the valence
band. This “valley” degree of freedom, similar to electronic charge and spin, has been proposed as an
information carrier for new classes of electronic and optoelectronic devices. The basic requirement of
information processing is to be able to create and manipulate a flow of valley pseudospin, i.e. valley
pseudospin current. Valley pseudospin currents have been demonstrated in recent experiments in
monolayer molybdenum disulfide and graphene on hexagonal boron nitride. However, the key
fundamental questions regarding the nature of valley pseudospin transport remain open. This project
will investigate the importance of Berry curvature effects in valley pseudospin transport and explore
regimes for quantized valley Hall conductivity and pure valley pseudospin currents. The study will rely on
combined optical and electrical transport techniques to create, manipulate and detect valley pseudospin
currents in two‐dimensional (2D) van der Waals’ materials of hexagonal structure. The insights provided
by this research will deepen the understanding of valley pseudospin transport in 2D and help the
development of novel valley‐based technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
28
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
On the Interaction between Non‐Thermal Plasmas and Small Metallic Particles: Plasmonic Plasmas
Dr. Lorenzo Mangolini, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California, Riverside
Riverside, CA 92521
Despite finding broad applications ranging from lighting to semiconductor processing, non‐
thermal plasmas remain far from being completely understood. In particular, there is a need for
understanding the rich physics underlying dusty plasmas – discharges with small powder particles
dispersed within the plasma volume. There is still a significant gap of knowledge with respect to how the
presence of such small particles influences the plasma properties, a fact that can be largely attributed to
the lack of a detailed experimental characterization of such systems. This project will establish an
enabling approach that will advance the state‐of‐the‐art in dusty plasmas by using small metallic
particles in place of the most common semiconducting nanoparticles. Metallic particles will be injected
in a low‐pressure discharge using different approaches but with independent control over particle size
and density in the plasma. This procedure will enable application of the Langmuir probe technique for
the characterization of electron kinetics in dusty plasmas and exploration of new regimes in which there
is a strong coupling between the optical emission from the discharge and the plasmonic response from
the nanoparticles dispersed within the plasma volume. In addition, ultra‐fast laser excitation of
plasmonic particles dispersed within the plasma volume will be used as an additional novel tool to
control basic plasma properties. A complementary theoretical investigation of the dusty plasma system
under consideration will be performed by solving the Boltzmann transport equation while accounting
for the presence of nanoparticles in the discharge in a self‐consistent manner.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
29
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Biomolecular Assembly Processes in the Design of Novel Functional Materials
Dr. Jeetain Mittal, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015
The ability to design complex functional materials by harnessing DNA‐mediated interactions
between nano‐ and micron‐sized particles holds exciting promise for revolutionizing energy‐related
material applications such as catalysis, molecular separations and sensing. This project seeks to develop
a comprehensive computational strategy to seamlessly connect various scales involved in DNA‐mediated
particle assembly, ranging from interactions between both standard Watson‐Crick and often ignored
non‐Watson‐Crick base pairs to interactions between two complementary DNA‐coated particles and
then to multi‐particle assembly into complex crystalline phases. Advanced computational methods will
be used to identify candidate solid crystalline phases and the rates of transformation between these
phases in order to isolate the effects of thermodynamic and kinetic variables. This project also aims to
elucidate the role of shear as a potentially novel handle for overcoming some of the persistent
stumbling blocks in DNA‐mediated assembly of crystalline structures such as the narrow temperature
window for crystallization and kinetic slowdown. This comprehensive strategy will enable elucidation of
assembly mechanisms and their sensitivity to, and thereby identification of, key system parameters
available for rationally designing and controlling DNA‐mediated assembly. Ultimately, advances made in
this research will improve the knowledgebase of multi‐scale DNA‐mediated particle interactions to a
level enabling facile translation into sets of fundamentally rooted design rules. These will prove
invaluable for guiding rational design and assembly of particulate structures of prescribed crystalline
symmetry and lattice parameters as well as tailored complexity and function.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
30
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Exploiting Small Signatures: Quantifying Nanoscale Structure and Behavior
Dr. Katharine Page, Instrument Scientist
Diffraction Group
Chemical and Engineering Materials Division
Neutron Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
In catalysis, biomineralization and drug delivery, fuel cell and battery chemistry, geological
processes, and a host of functional phenomena at the nanoscale, unique properties and material
characteristics are governed by intricate structural details eluding current characterization methods.
This effort will encompass side‐by‐side development and application of neutron total scattering
methods aimed at uncovering the links in nanostructure between surface chemistry, particle
morphology, and "internal" crystal structure. The influence of surface absorbed species on the atomic
distortions, structural stability, and growth pathways of titania nanocrystals will be explored,
experimentally isolating and characterizing the fluid and atomic interface structures that impact
polymorph formation in solvothermal and hydrothermal environments. The distinct effects of particle
shape and surface termination on the properties and structural phase transitions of ferroelectric oxide
nanocrystals will be pursued, investigating factors that stabilize polarization at smaller nanocrystal
dimensions, across phase transitions, or under applied field. Concurrently, instrumentation, data
collection, data reduction, and structure refinement methodologies will be advanced for in situ and
stroboscopic neutron total scattering measurements. These investigations will set the stage for a
broader approach to nanostructure and interface characterization that validates theory and simulation,
evaluates synthesis and fabrication, and demonstrates enhanced performance in atomic‐ and nano‐scale
material processes.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
31
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Damage Mechanism Interactions at the Plasma‐Materials Interface
Dr. Chad M. Parish, Research and Development Staff Member
Radiation Effects and Microstructural Analysis Group
Materials Science and Technology Division
Physical Sciences Directorate
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
This research intends to improve the scientific basis for design of plasma‐facing materials (PFMs)
for fusion power by quantitatively characterizing the initiation of radiation‐induced damage at the
plasma‐materials interface. New high performance PFMs capable of withstanding the harsh
environment of magnetic fusion energy (MFE) are of crucial importance for achievement of
commercially viable fusion power plants. The divertors in MFE concepts such as ITER will be
simultaneously subjected to high temperatures and heat flux, high‐dose neutron irradiation, and
bombardment by high fluxes and fluences of helium and hydrogen isotopes. These multiple damage
modes cause severe degradation that will put MFE operation at risk. Tungsten is the primary PFM
candidate, but suitable strategies to mitigate degradation do not exist. There is a knowledge gap
between computational materials science of PFMs under irradiation and the empirical understanding of
the response of plasma‐exposed materials in these environments. Bridging this gap requires
experimentally confirmed knowledge of what processes and interactions occur between the atomistic‐
theory and phenomenological‐observation ranges. This research intends to improve the science‐based
design of future PFM alloys by providing quantitative experimental measurements of nanometer‐scale
defect nucleation and early evolution under irradiation. This research will use ion irradiation, in‐reactor
neutron irradiation, and plasma exposures at tokamaks and linear devices and, through a combination
of thermal desorption spectroscopy, positron annihilation spectroscopy, and electron microscopy, will
quantify helium‐induced defect nucleation and growth as functions of tungsten's starting structure and
pre‐irradiation condition. This information will be related to what is known from atomistic modeling and
simulation and from experimental observations at more macroscopic levels. The work will support the
Office of Fusion Energy Sciences (FES) mission and help provide a fusion nuclear science basis for ITER
and beyond.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
32
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Three‐dimensional Structure of the Nucleon
Dr. Andrew Puckett, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
Protons and neutrons, the building blocks of the atomic nucleus, are understood to be different
quantum states of a single entity known as the nucleon. The nucleon is a bound state of three
elementary particles known as quarks, confined in nucleons by the strong interaction. Owing to recent
advances in experimental capability and theoretical understanding, it is now possible to map the
nucleon’s three‐dimensional quark structure in both coordinate and momentum space through detailed
studies of energetic electron‐nucleon collisions. The recently completed 12 gigaelectronvolt (GeV)
upgrade of Jefferson Lab’s Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) nearly doubles the
maximum beam energy for electron scattering experiments in the existing experimental Halls A, B and C.
Combined with the unparalleled intensity and polarization of CEBAF’s continuous beam, the 12 GeV
upgrade enables a three‐dimensional (3‐D) nucleon imaging program of unprecedented breadth and
precision. The major objective of this research is the execution of a family of experiments in Jefferson
Lab’s experimental Hall A known as the Super BigBite Spectrometer (SBS) program. The SBS is a novel
magnetic spectrometer designed for the detection of forward‐going, high‐energy particles produced in
electron‐nucleon collisions at the highest achievable intensities of CEBAF. The planned physics program
of SBS will dramatically improve the world’s knowledge of two complementary aspects of nucleon
structure. Measurements of proton and neutron form factors using SBS will determine the spatial
distributions of the nucleon's electric charge and magnetism at distance scales approximately twenty
times smaller than the charge radius of the proton. The SBS will also probe the neutron's three‐
dimensional spin structure with unprecedented precision. Planned measurements of spin asymmetries
in electron scattering from polarized 3He nuclei will provide critical input to the 3‐D imaging in
momentum space of the spin and orbital motion of quarks in the neutron.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
33
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Understanding Soil Microbial Sources of Nitrous Acid and their Effect on Carbon‐Nitrogen Cycle
Interactions
Dr. Jonathan D. Raff, Assistant Professor
School of Public & Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47401
Our current understanding of Earth’s climate is based on predictive atmospheric models that
have become necessarily complex as they are extended to answer global‐scale questions. Unfortunately,
current models are unable to accurately represent all of the important chemical components due to
challenges in identifying details of biogeochemical processes occurring within the terrestrial
environment that have a significant impact on the atmosphere above. This is especially true for soil
microbial emissions of reactive nitrogen (e.g., nitrous acid, nitric oxide, and nitrogen dioxide), which
directly and indirectly affect climate by controlling the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere, lifetime of
greenhouse gases, and formation rate of aerosols. This project will provide an improved mechanistic
understanding of the fate of reactive nitrogen in soil that will enable these processes to be more
accurately scaled from the laboratory to the ecosystem and global scales. A unique multidisciplinary
approach will be taken to examine how variability in land surfaces and soil properties impact reactive
nitrogen emissions, and to link soil fluxes of these gases to their microbial sources using a combination
of laboratory and field studies, isotopic analysis, and genomic techniques. In addition, this research will
leverage DOE investments in instrumentation at the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory
(EMSL) to study the effect of biogenic emissions of reactive nitrogen on the oxidative capacity of the soil
environment and to understand how this is then coupled to the combined land‐atmosphere carbon
cycle. Results will be parameterized and included in the Community Earth System Model (CESM), with
the goal of improving representation of the land‐atmosphere exchange of reactive nitrogen in global
climate models. These outcomes will support the Biological & Environmental Research Program’s goal of
“discovering the physical, chemical, and biological drivers and environmental impacts of climate
change.”
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological & Environmental Research.
34
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Doping Metallic Grain Boundaries to Control Atomic Structure and Damage Tolerance
Dr. Timothy J. Rupert, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
Grain boundaries and other interfaces often act as nucleation sites for cracks and voids that lead
to failure during plastic deformation of metallic materials. While it is known that interface character and
structural state can greatly influence this damage nucleation process, the current level of understanding
and control over such details is relatively limited. The objective of this research is to obtain a
fundamental understanding of how grain boundary structure can be controlled by locally and selectively
adding other elements with the idea of inducing planned grain boundary phases or “complexions” for
desired behavior. The effect of complexion structure on dislocation accommodation mechanisms will
also be studied to improve the field’s understanding of damage nucleation at interfaces and identify
materials design strategies for extremely tough materials. This research will use a combination of
cutting‐edge computational, experimental, and characterization techniques to isolate and understand
the importance of atomic grain boundary structure as well as interfacial chemistry. The fundamental
insights provided by this research will enable the creation of advanced engineering metals with
improved damage tolerance.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
35
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Hybrid Nanoscale X‐ray Imaging: Direct and Computational Imaging with Advanced X‐ray Diffractive
Optics
Dr. Anne Sakdinawat, Associate Staff Scientist
Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
In the past decade, advances in x‐ray photon science capabilities have paved the way for new
scientific advances in areas such as energy‐related materials characterization, nano‐crystallography, and
ultrafast chemical probing using synchrotrons and x‐ray free electron lasers. Advances in
nanofabrication of x‐ray optics technology can greatly expand the existing capabilities through
development of new ways to control and manipulate x‐ray beams in space and time. The emphasis of
the planned work is to advance scientific capabilities at synchrotrons and x‐ray free electron laser
facilities through the development and use of advanced diffractive optics and hybrid imaging
techniques. New nanofabrication technology will be extended to produce high‐efficiency nanoscale
focusing optics for both synchrotrons and x‐ray free electron lasers. Specialized x‐ray diffractive optics
will be used to extend hybrid x‐ray imaging techniques and will address current limitations in sample
throughput, radiation damage, and hardware.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
36
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Defining the Minimal Set of Microbial Genes Required for Valorization of Lignin Biomass
Dr. Elizabeth S. Sattely, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94304
As the world population surpasses seven billion, science and engineering are faced with the
pressing challenge of creating technology to shift reliance on petroleum resources to renewable
feedstocks for the production of liquid fuels and platform chemicals. A primary candidate feedstock is
plant biomass, where most of current efforts have focused on converting cellulosic sugars to biofuels,
replacement petrochemicals, and novel renewable materials. However, the other major fraction of plant
biomass is lignin, a hydrocarbon‐rich biopolymer left over after cellulose is used to make ethanol and
other liquid biofuels. Lignin is the second most abundant biopolymer on earth and represents a critically
underutilized renewable resource that could be a major feedstock for future biorefineries.
Unfortunately, without sufficient tools to convert lignin into its simple aromatic components, we are
unable to generate valuable compounds from this abundant biopolymer; instead, lignin is typically
burned for thermal energy. This project will use a novel approach to identify the minimal set of
microbial enzymes necessary for the synthesis of valuable chemicals from lignin as a byproduct of
biofuel production from biomass. This research will examine two separate stages of lignin breakdown
carried out by the microbes that do it best: (1) early breakdown of lignin into soluble fragments by
wood‐rotting fungi and (2) further conversion of those lignin fragments into useful chemicals performed
by specific soil microbes. The initial goal of the project is the discovery and biochemical characterization
of the enzymes required for lignin metabolism. The fungal and bacterial genes that code for those
enzymes will be then used to engineer a microbial host that will efficiently convert lignin waste streams
directly into valuable platform chemicals. This effort will leverage DOE investments in microbial genome
analysis, and secure a critical channel for lignin biomass utilization that will also help to render
lignocellulosic biomass a viable feedstock for the production of renewable liquid biofuels.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
37
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Crystal Growth, Nucleation, Structure and Dynamics at Metal‐Organic Framework/Solution Interfaces
Dr. Jordan R. Schmidt, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI 53715
Metal‐organic frameworks (MOFs) are a hybrid materials made from metal cations bridged by
molecular linking groups. These components assemble under synthetic conditions to generate three‐
dimensional crystalline solids. MOFs exhibit extremely high surface areas and, as such, have been
employed for a wide variety of applications, including gas adsorption, separations, sensing, and catalysis.
Yet synthesis of specific, targeted, MOF structure can be an elusive goal, requiring a delicate balance of
reaction conditions, often discovered empirically by time consuming screenings over reaction
conditions. In general, targeted MOF synthesis is currently hindered by the lack of a comprehensive and
predictive model of the fundamental processes occurring at the MOF‐solution interface under
synthetically relevant conditions. This work addresses the need for a predictive model of MOF interfacial
properties by using state‐of‐the‐art simulation approaches to model MOF interfacial structure and
stability, crystal growth, nucleation, and post‐synthetic modification. This will provide crucial insights
into how those processes can be influenced in terms of synthetically controllable parameters.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
38
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Plasma Material Interaction with Three‐Dimensional Plasma Boundaries
Dr. Oliver Schmitz, Assistant Professor
Department of Engineering Physics
University of Wisconsin‐Madison
Madison, WI 53715
The quest to understand the interaction of a high temperature plasma and its surrounding
material surfaces is one of the key challenges on the path to harness fusion power as a new,
fundamental energy source. This challenge typically involves the goal of achieving high density, low
temperature (detached) plasmas close to magnetic field divertor target plates as well as understanding
the plasma material interactions (PMI) in this regime. This area of research involves studying physical
processes at spatial scales from nanometers to meters in all states of matter and across a broad range of
energies. New modeling capabilities, which help interpret data from current experiments and enable
extrapolation to future devices, are required. This is particularly true for toroidal magnetic confinement
devices with three‐dimensional (3D) plasma boundaries such as tokamak devices when perturbing
external magnetic fields are applied and for stellarators with an inherent 3D plasma configuration. The
goal of this research is to examine and assess the impact of 3D plasma boundaries on PMI in
combination with detached plasma regimes. A critical element will be to experimentally identify critical
common and unique features of 3D boundaries as compared to axisymmetric edge plasmas. Establishing
a numerical toolset to support the development of predictive capabilities for these regimes is the
intended key outcome of the research project. The complexity of this scientific endeavor requires a
broad approach, and this research effort will help establish a solid basis to advance understanding in this
area.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
39
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
In Situ Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Mixed‐Valence Inorganic Crystal Formation
Dr. Daniel P. Shoemaker, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61820
Efficient synthesis of materials with tailored properties is a Grand Challenge in Basic Energy
Sciences. This project will enable controlled access of new phases by establishing a toolkit of
experimental and computational methods for probing reactions out of equilibrium. In particular, the
phase formation of light‐absorbing semiconductors will be studied. In these materials, new crystalline
phases would offer unique routes to control the transport of electronic charge. Most traditional
materials synthesis methods assume that the crystalline products are close to thermodynamic
equilibrium. In those cases, the processes obey phase diagrams and the formation energy can be
calculated in a straightforward way. On the contrary, the stepping stones between reactants and
products are less well‐behaved. They are often metastable materials that can be isolated and modified
for technological gain. A central focus is charting the path of reactions in situ with X‐ray diffraction. In
addition to probing the reactions that create specific target materials, the thermodynamic and kinetic
barriers to tailoring these materials will be explored by in situ gas flow. Reconciling experimental results
with computational predictions will move this field toward a regime of design.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
40
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Confronting Dark Matter with the Multiwavelength Sky
Dr. Tracy R. Slatyer, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Dark matter comprises roughly eighty percent of the matter in the universe; its existence is a
key clue to new fundamental physics. However, its nature remains an open question and a central focus
of the High Energy Physics program of the Department of Energy. This research will develop the
theoretical foundation for dark matter searches using light from both our Galaxy and the early universe.
It will encompass data‐driven methods to extract putative signals from complex astrophysical
backgrounds, numerical modeling of the young cosmos, and novel particle theory techniques adapted
from collider experiments. Furthermore, this research will explore a bright glow of high‐energy light
from the center of our Galaxy that has been identified as a possible product of colliding dark matter
particles, seeking to delineate both its detailed properties and the implications if it indeed originates
from new physics. Understanding this signal will either illuminate the hidden bulk of the universe's
matter for the first time or point toward unexpected and striking astrophysical phenomena in the heart
of the Milky Way.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
41
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
New Studies of Short‐Range Correlations and their Effects on Nuclei
Dr. Patricia Solvignon, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of New Hampshire
Durham, NH 03824
The nuclear force, which is responsible for holding the nucleus of an atom together, has been
under investigation for more than a century. Over the last decade, tremendous progress has been made
with the experimental evidence of a special configuration of protons and neutrons called short‐range
correlations. These short‐range correlations consist of protons and neutrons so close to one another
that they end up overlapping in the nuclear medium. Understanding their properties is not only
important to elucidate where the nuclear force’s missing strength is coming from but also has potential
to clarify a forty‐year‐old‐question about how the structure of protons and neutrons are modified inside
the nucleus. Short‐range correlation studies will also help in the area of astrophysics in modeling the
cooling process of the neutron stars and also in the area of neutrino physics, where very precise nuclear
models are needed to find the small signal created by neutrino oscillations. This project will conduct
several approved experiments scheduled to run using the upgraded Continuous Electron Beam
Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Laboratory in Newport News,
VA. The results from these experiments will provide different insights into the manifestation of the
nuclear force that have the potential to answer a many‐decades‐old‐question related to the origin of the
nuclear force and its effects on the substructure of protons and neutrons.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
42
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Tunable Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysis by Phenazine‐Modified Carbons
Dr. Yogesh Surendranath, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
The kinetically challenging reduction of oxygen to water is the efficiency‐limiting chemistry
underlying next generation energy conversion devices including fuel cells and metal‐air batteries.
Nitrogen‐doped carbons are a promising class of low‐cost, non‐toxic, earth‐abundant materials that are
able to catalyze this difficult reaction. However, the active site structures responsible for catalysis on
these materials remain elusive, preventing systematic improvement of catalyst activity, selectivity, and
durability. This project targets the chemical modification of carbon surfaces to generate well‐defined
nitrogen environments that are active for oxygen reduction catalysis. In particular, the research will
focus on developing bottom‐up strategies for constructing tunable catalyst active sites by ligating
polyfunctional organic molecules to carbon surfaces. By modifying the structure of the organic molecule,
the project will systematically pursue modulation of the electronic structure, proton transfer
environment, and metal‐binding affinity of surface active sites and correlation of these changes with
catalyst performance. The final aim is to uncover the design principles that underlie efficient
heterogeneous oxygen reduction catalysis on nitrogen‐containing carbon surfaces and, thereby, provide
a roadmap for developing designer electrodes for next generation energy storage technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
43
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Tracing Non‐equilibrium Phenomena in Correlated Materials by Using Ultrafast Electron Probes
Dr. Jing Tao, Physicist
Electron Microscopy and Nanostructure Group
Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department
Basic Energy Sciences Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
The intimate coupling between the charge, spin, orbital and lattice degrees of freedom
engenders many emergent properties in strongly correlated materials. However, it is challenging to
unravel the complex interplay of these degrees of freedom by probing equilibrium states using time‐
averaged techniques, thus preventing a complete interpretation of their novel properties. This project
aims to establish an understanding of the competing orders in these complex materials by investigating
non‐equilibrium phenomena. The project will be carried out using an existing ultrafast electron
diffraction (UED) instrument at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Utilizing pump‐probe techniques with
MeV (megaelectronvolt) electrons as the probe, the UED system has demonstrated the potential for
extraordinary sensitivity and high temporal resolution in detecting electronic structures far from
equilibrium. During the course of the project, instrumentation modifications will be conducted to
enhance the performance of the UED. Individual orders, such as charge order and orbital order,
associated with optical excitations will be probed and analyzed separately in the ultrafast time‐domain
to distinguish their roles in structural relaxation. The characterization of the non‐equilibrium electronic
states will reflect universal rules that govern the behavior of materials while offering guidance towards
designing new materials with ultimate property control.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
44
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Scaling Analytics for Image‐Based Experimental Data
Dr. Daniela M. Ushizima, Staff Scientist and Deputy Head
Data Analytics and Visualization Group
Computational Research Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720
Department of Energy (DOE) research across a myriad of science domains is increasingly reliant
on image‐based data from experiments; this project is aimed at helping scientists uncover relevant but
hidden information in digital images. The project will deliver a new modus operandi for analyzing
imaging results of experiments conducted at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and other DOE
facilities, providing insight to guide and optimize experiments in collaboration with colleagues in Basic
Energy Sciences and Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR). To better exploit the scientific
value of high resolution, multidimensional image datasets, this multi‐disciplinary work is designed
around a coordinated research effort connecting (1) state‐of‐the‐art data analysis methods based on
pattern recognition and machine learning; (2) emerging algorithms for dealing with massive data sets;
and (3) advances in evolving computer architectures to process the torrent of data. The result will be a
set of data science models and new software infrastructure that provide tools that work "on the factory
floor" as well as workhorse techniques for processing experimental data at ASCR supercomputing
centers. These advances will accelerate the analysis of image‐based recordings, scaling scientific
procedures by reducing time between experiments, increasing efficiency, and opening more
opportunities for more users of the imaging facilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
45
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Ultra‐precise Electron Spectroscopy to Measure Neutrino Mass
Dr. Brent A. VanDevender, Detector Development Team Leader
Radiation Detection and Nuclear Science Group
Signature Science and Technology Division
National Security Directorate
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Richland, WA 99354
It is firmly established that neutrinos have a small but non‐zero rest mass, contrary to the
Standard Model prescription of exactly massless neutrinos. Neutrino mass could have broad
consequences for physics, ranging from the microscopic details of quantum field theories for physics
beyond the Standard Model to the understanding of large‐scale structure in the universe. Evidence for
neutrino mass follows from the observation of oscillations among the three Standard Model neutrino
flavor eigenstates. Oscillation phenomena reveal the mass differences but do not depend on the
absolute scale of neutrino mass. Furthermore, of the two independent mass differences, the sign is only
determined for one, leading to an ambiguous hierarchical ordering of masses. The most auspicious way
to measure the absolute neutrino mass scale is by the tritium endpoint method in which neutrino mass
is revealed by its effects on the endpoint region of a precisely measured tritium beta‐decay electron
spectrum. This research will develop the recently demonstrated technique of cyclotron radiation
emission spectroscopy (CRES) into a tritium endpoint experiment. The ultimate neutrino mass sensitivity
of CRES has been estimated to be sensitive to neutrino masses typical of the so‐called inverted mass
hierarchy. An existing CRES instrument will continue to provide data for systematic studies and early
tritium endpoint results. A new CRES instrument will be established with the goal to produce a neutrino
mass limit comparable to existing upper limits from tritium endpoint experiments at Mainz (Germany)
and Troitsk (Russia). These results will lay the foundation for the proposal of Project 8, the ultimate CRES
tritium endpoint experiment to reach the neutrino mass scale of the inverted hierarchy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
46
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Exploring Covalency in the Actinides Using Soft Donor‐Based Ligands and Metal‐Ligand Multiple
Bonding
Dr. Justin R. Walensky, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
The actinide elements are known to prefer oxygen and other hard Lewis bases. Curiously, the
use of extractor ligands that contain sulfur, a soft Lewis base, has led to the selective sequestering of
actinides over their lanthanide counterparts. Therefore, the coordination chemistry of energy
production relevant actinides, specifically thorium, uranium, and neptunium, with soft Lewis bases
(sulfur, selenium, phosphorous, arsenic) warrants further investigation. Additionally, compounds
containing multiple bonds between the actinide and ligands coordinated to them will be explored to
examine pi‐bonding with 5f orbitals. The overall impact of this project will be the creation of new
compounds that demonstrate the unique structure, bonding, and reactivity of these under studied
elements while developing the underlying fundamental science involved in the separation of actinides.
Furthermore, this research will support the dwindling nuclear workforce by training the next generation
of students to characterize, manipulate, and safely handle radioactive elements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
47
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Ensemble Simulation Techniques and Fast Randomized Algorithms
Dr. Jonathan Weare, Assistant Professor
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
This project develops novel ensemble simulation techniques and fast randomized algorithms for
DOE‐mission science problems. Applications include the determination of electronic ground states of
chemical systems and efficient molecular dynamics simulation for drug design. For science problems
involving the estimate of statistical averages, a conventional approach is to run multiple, non‐
communicating copies of the simulation and then to average the results. In contrast, the proposed
ensemble simulation techniques intentionally introduce limited communication between the copies to
achieve problem‐specific goals, such as: incorporation of information from observed data; exploration of
rare events of acute physical interest; or faster relaxation of a dynamical system to equilibrium. Such
low‐communication schemes are ideally suited for emerging, multi‐core and many‐core computational
systems. The project also explores new directions in fast numerical linear algebra methods (as motivated
by the ensemble simulation approach) and includes new low‐cost iterative eigenvector solvers for large‐
scale computational physics and data analysis applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
48
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
Muon g‐2: Precision Determination of the Magnetic Field and Enhanced Trolley Features
Dr. Peter Winter, Assistant Physicist
Muon Group
High Energy Physics Division
Physical Sciences and Engineering Directorate
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439
The muon is the heavier cousin of the electron and is used in a variety of particle physics
experiments. A prominent example is the new Muon g‐2 experiment currently being built at Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory to measure an intrinsic property of the muon called the anomalous
magnetic moment (g‐2), which is sensitive to many forms of new particles and physics. Currently, the
most precise measurement of g‐2 shows a slight deviation from the prediction of the standard model.
The new Muon g‐2 experiment will improve the current sensitivity by a factor of four, which will
transform the currently measured value into a discovery of new physics and particles if the measured
value remains the same. This improvement in the determination of g‐2 requires a high‐precision
measurement of the magnetic field of a 14‐meter diameter storage ring. The main component of this
research is the establishment of a dedicated analysis center to determine the magnetic field and all of its
associated measurement uncertainties. The analysis will incorporate over 400 magnetic field probes and
a special trolley system to precisely map the field along the 45‐meter circumference storage ring.
Hardware upgrades to the trolley will reduce measurement uncertainties and improve the overall
precision of the experiment, increasing its sensitivity to new physics. This research is essential for
obtaining a precise measurement of g‐2 and is therefore an important ingredient for the successful
execution of the Muon g‐2 experiment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
49
DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Awardee Abstracts Fiscal Year 2015
The Effect of Soil Moisture and Surface Heterogeneity on Clouds and Precipitation: Inferences from
ARM Observations and Large‐Eddy Simulations
Dr. Yunyan Zhang, Atmospheric Scientist
Cloud Processes Group
Physical & Life Sciences Directorate
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94550
The goal of this project is to improve our scientific understanding of the processes through
which soil moisture and surface heterogeneity affect the formation of clouds and the triggering of
precipitation events. Large discrepancies exist in the representation of such processes in various global
or regional climate models. The need to use observational data and cloud‐scale models to understand
the relevant physical mechanisms at the process level and thus constrain climate model development
has become increasingly clear. This work will use observations from the DOE Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement (ARM) Program's climate facility at the Southern Great Plains (SGP) site, which has a
network of stations with long‐term, continuous measurement of soil moisture, heat fluxes, clouds, and
precipitation. The observational analysis will: 1) use the constrained variational analysis method to
characterize regional moisture recycling and the land‐atmosphere coupling strength for different
convective regimes, e.g., locally versus non‐locally generated, and over different land covers; 2)
investigate the mechanisms by which soil moisture influences precipitation due to the effects of the soil
moisture anomaly on atmospheric stability and humidity; and 3) explore the effect of mesoscale
circulation induced by heterogeneities in soil moisture on the triggering and maintenance of convection.
Large‐eddy simulation coupled with land‐surface models will resolve cloud and rain processes at their
native physical scales and help explain the observational findings and develop insights into the
responsible physical mechanisms. The work will also include diagnosis and testing of parameterizations
of turbulence, convection, and land features in regional and global climate models run in weather‐
forecast mode based on relationships and mechanisms found in the observational studies and large‐
eddy simulation results. The process‐level findings are critical for constraining climate‐model
parameterization development and for resolving discrepancies, thus reducing uncertainties in climate
simulations. This work will bridge the gap between in‐situ measurements made at DOE's ARM facility
and the DOE‐supported next generation of high‐resolution regional and global climate models.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
50
