Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Development of High‐Density Microwave‐Multiplexed Transition Edge Sensor Bolometers for Next‐
Generation CMB Cameras
Dr. Zeeshan Ahmed, Panofsky Fellow
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
The infrared glow of the hot, dense, infant universe from more than 13.8 billion years ago is still
around today, although the expansion of the universe has redshifted it into the microwave spectrum.
This redshifted light is called the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). Studying it provides key insights
in cosmology as well as into the high‐energy physics that was dominant in the early universe but
inaccessible in laboratories now. The CMB is imaged using microwave‐sensitive cameras that contain
arrays of cryogenic superconducting sensors. This research effort aims to enable the next‐generation of
CMB cameras with 50 to 100 times more sensor pixels than current cameras. The desired leap in sensor
count must overcome scaling limitations of the various cryogenic signal‐multiplexing readout schemes
used in CMB cameras today. The planned work will optimize and combine in a single package Transition‐
Edge Sensor (TES) Bolometers, a reliable CMB sensing technology, with superconducting electrical
resonators, which naturally support signal multiplexing in far greater numbers than currently achieved.
The coupling between these elements will be made using optimized Radio‐frequency Superconducting
Quantum Interference Devices (RF‐SQUIDs). A scalable readout electronics system suitable to this signal
transduction scheme will also be designed and implemented. This work will benefit the proposed next‐
generation ground‐based CMB experiment called CMB‐S4, which aims to probe the early‐stage
expansion of the universe called inflation, search for hints of undiscovered sterile particles, and
constrain the mass of neutrinos. Additionally, CMB‐S4’s data will provide further insights into dark
energy and the large‐scale structure of the universe when combined with complementary data from
optical and x‐ray surveys. Finally, this work will enable the scaling of many other ultrasensitive photon‐
and particle‐sensing applications that use TES arrays.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
1
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Investigation of Short‐Range Ordering in Transition Metal Compounds by Diffuse Scattering
Dr. Jared M. Allred, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
The University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
Future energy needs and sustainability require new materials with novel properties for such
applications as energy production, storage and transport and microelectronics. Quantum materials with
several competing interactions at the electronic level offer tremendous opportunity to discover, design
and tune properties for such applications. Although it has been recognized that small deviations in
atomic positions, driven by the competing electronic interactions, in crystalline materials can have
significant impact on properties, it remains a challenge to accurately characterize such deviations (short‐
range order) due to the lack of advanced instruments and analysis tools to characterize them. Recently,
powerful neutron and x‐ray scattering instruments have been developed at the DOE user facilities to
address this challenge, and new methodologies and efficient analysis tools are being developed to
accurately measure such short‐range order. The planned project will conduct research on transition
metal compounds whose properties can be tuned by strategically substituting some atoms. High‐purity
single crystals will be grown, and diffuse scattering will be measured using the newly available
capabilities. Theory‐based computational tools will be developed to accurately analyze the short‐range
order to understand its effects on material properties. This understanding can then be used to design
materials with improved properties. The project thus will unveil new insights on a class of quantum
materials and concurrently develop new methodologies and tools that can be augmented with the tools
being developed at the scattering facilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
2
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Microbial Environmental Feedbacks and the Evolution of Soil Organic Matter
Dr. Nicholas J. Bouskill, Research Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
The vast majority of Earth’s organic matter is stored in soil. The products of microbial
metabolism as well as dead microbes (necromass), along with residues from plants and other organisms
at different stages of decomposition, constitute a large fraction of that soil organic matter (SOM). The
ability of microbes to modify and degrade SOM depends on physicochemical characteristics of the soil,
affecting SOM stability and persistence. While the contributions of microbes to the decomposition and
loss of SOM have been intensively studied, their role in maintaining the terrestrial SOM is poorly
understood. Specifically, how fungi, bacteria, and archaea participate in the production of SOM, the
interaction between SOM and minerals, and the formation of soil aggregates remains a significant gap in
our understanding of the terrestrial nutrient cycle. The chemical composition of SOM is in large measure
determined by soil bacterial metabolism, which is impacted by changes in rainfall patterns. This research
will conduct field and laboratory experiments and computational modeling to understand the role of
microbial communities in stabilizing SOM under different water availability conditions in tropical soils.
The results of this project will increase our understanding of the effects that microbes have on the
global geochemical and nutrient cycles, addressing DOE’s mission in energy and the environment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
3
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Next‐Generation Particle Spectroscopy at FRIB: A Gas Jet Target for Solenoidal Spectrometers
Dr. Kelly A. Chipps, Liane B. Russell Fellow
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Nuclear reaction studies with radioactive beams can provide crucial information on the
structure of exotic nuclei, the mechanisms by which they interact and self‐organize, and how strongly
they participate in the reactions that drive explosive and quiescent astrophysical scenarios. A powerful
tool for studying transfer reactions is the solenoidal spectrometer, such as the HELIcal Orbit
Spectrometer (HELIOS) device at Argonne National Laboratory. By applying a large external magnetic
field, a simple relationship between the position of a detected particle and its energy is obtained, and
experiments do not suffer from the kinematic compression and worsened energy resolution of typical
transfer reaction measurements with radioactive beams. However, with increasingly exotic beams such
as those anticipated from the flagship Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), target effects play a larger
and larger role in the best achievable resolution of solenoidal spectrometers. A gas jet provides a dense,
localized, uniform, and robust target for radioactive beam reaction studies with many significant
advantages over traditional target materials. For light‐ion‐induced nucleon transfer reactions, a gas jet
provides a pure target of hydrogen, deuterium, or helium, without window materials or contaminants.
The target is also robust against radiation and heat damage. By providing a gas target that is localized,
reaction products can be precisely measured, and coincidence measurements are improved. Transfer
reaction measurements made with gas jet targets can be cleaner, can display better resolution than
those made with traditional targets, and can overcome the current bottleneck in the best achievable
resolution of HELIOS‐like devices. This research program will undertake a unique technical approach,
implementing a pure and localized gas jet target with HELIOS and exploiting the hybrid system to better
understand exotic nuclei and their astrophysical reactions. Such a device could then act as a blueprint
for a next‐generation solenoidal spectrometer at FRIB. With the availability of a pure and localized gas
jet target in combination with developments in exotic radioactive beams and next‐generation solenoidal
spectrometers, the range of reaction studies that are experimentally possible with FRIB is vastly
expanded.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
4
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Polarized Resonant X‐ray Scattering to Measure Molecular Orientation and Conformation in Organic
Nanostructures
Dr. Brian A. Collins, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Washington State University
Pullman, WA 99164
The ordering of organic (carbon‐based) molecules into nanostructures drives useful materials
properties for applications such as organic light emitting diodes, polymer batteries, and flexible
transistor circuits. However, there is a current lack of techniques to measure this ordering. Recently, X‐
ray scattering techniques involving molecular resonances have shown promise in distinguishing
molecules and their orientation. Such a resonance occurs when an atom absorbs an X‐ray precisely
tuned in energy to excite a core electron into a bound molecular orbital associated with a local bond.
Each resonance is bond selective, and the X‐ray polarization is, furthermore, sensitive to the orientation
of that bond. The objective of this research is to develop methods, models, and analysis techniques that
harness these resonant phenomena in X‐ray scattering measurements to quantitatively probe ordering
of organic molecules within nanostructures. New physical models for polarized resonant X‐ray scattering
that accurately describe these complex molecular resonances will enable measurements of how
molecules assemble, orient and conform at the nanometer scale. The work will test the sensitivity of the
technique in terms of both spatial resolution for molecular position and orientation for molecular
ordering. This new measurement capability will enable characterization of structure‐property
relationships that lead to disruptive technologies of printable, stretchable, and biocompatible devices
based on organic materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
5
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Flow‐Through Neutron Reflectometry ‐ An In Operando Sample Environment for Active Polymer
Interface Studies
Dr. Steven C. DeCaluwe, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
Polymers play a key role in numerous energy storage and conversion devices (such as fuel cells
and batteries), which will enable electric vehicles to mitigate the environmental impacts linked to
conventional fuel use. Despite the importance of these polymers, there are several unanswered
questions about their properties in actual operating devices. These limit the development of cost‐
effective energy storage solutions. Neutron reflectometry (NR) is a powerful technique for material
analysis at layered thin‐film interfaces in relevant chemical environments, but the technique’s need for
very flat samples currently limits NR measurements relevant to operating devices. Because devices such
as lithium‐air batteries and polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) require stable materials
that provide fast chemical reactions and species transport, measurement of active polymers – during
chemical reactions or while species move through the polymer – is essential to understand and address
the limitations of polymers in these devices. This work will enable first‐of‐their‐kind “flow‐through” NR
measurements in the presence of reactions and species transport to advance the understanding of
polymers for lithium‐air batteries and PEMFCs. In this work, flow‐through NR measurements at Oak
Ridge National Lab will be combined with other experimental results to provide heretofore‐unavailable
fundamental insight into the role of polymers in operating energy storage devices. Computer
simulations validated against the multiple measurements will be used to correlate, interpret, and
understand the information for a consistent description of polymer and device function. Fundamental
insights about material properties will be scaled up via device‐level simulations, which will be validated
against real‐world devices to provide a scientifically guided design tool for next‐generation energy
storage and conversion devices. These activities represent a unique integration of in operando
measurements and multi‐scale numerical models, which will enable efficient iteration between theory,
experiment, and simulation for advances in the understanding and design of advanced energy devices.
The work will have a significant positive impact on the US energy economy, enabling efficient
electrochemical energy storage and conversion for electric vehicles powered by clean energy. Moreover,
this work will lay the foundation for fundamental insights in a number of other important systems,
including sodium‐air batteries, water purification systems, sensors, biological membranes, and chemical
separators.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
6
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Multi‐scale Modeling of Extreme Events and Impact Information
Dr. Naresh Devineni, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil Engineering
The City College of New York
New York, NY 10031
The simultaneous occurrence and persistence of multiple extremes can be associated with
large‐scale surface temperature gradients, regional forcings, and intermediate atmospheric variables
such as the potential vorticity (i.e., a measure of cyclone generation), regional blocking frequency, and
frequency and intensity of persistent meteorological high and low pressure systems. This research will
adopt a novel methodology for identifying the causality and predictability of hydrometeorological (i.e.,
the water cycle and the transfer of water and energy between the land surface and the lower
atmosphere) extreme events. The hydrometeorological extreme events that are the primary focus in
this context are extreme precipitation, and the resulting floods due to compounding rainfall events. The
two research objectives include: (1) investigation of the physical causality of regional to continental
scale hydrometeorological extreme events using Information Theory‐based causality tests in a Bayesian
learning framework; and (2) development of stochastic simulation and predictive models using these
drivers for the occurrence of extreme precipitation and floods of varying duration. For the first
objective, statistical learning frameworks using causality tests, model checking, and hypothesis
generation will be designed with both reverse causal inference (what causes an outcome) and forward
causal inference (effects of the causes) to verify dependence of the above‐identified
hydrometeorological extreme events on the earth system and atmospheric controls. The second
objective will employ a stochastic modeling strategy that integrates the above factors and accounts for
correlations across multiple events and multiple locations under dynamic earth system conditions at
different time scales. Bayesian network models will be used with full uncertainty analysis along the
causal chain.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
7
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Future Directions in the Hunt for the Electric Dipole Moment of Radium
Dr. Matthew R. Dietrich, Assistant Physicist
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Lemont, IL 60439
One great mystery is how our universe came to be dominated by matter when our current
understanding suggests that a nearly perfect symmetry should exist between matter and antimatter.
The Big Bang should have yielded a universe with nearly equal parts matter and anti‐matter, with
subsequent matter‐antimatter annihilation leading to a universe almost devoid of either. These
considerations imply there must be some significant, undiscovered violation of time‐reversal (T)
symmetry. Under Time‐reversal symmetry, physics should behave identically if time runs forward or
backwards. The discovery of any new fundamental process or property that violates T‐symmetry would
therefore provide a powerful clue toward solving the matter‐antimatter mystery. One such property is
an Electric Dipole Moment (EDM). This research will look for the EDM of a radium atom, which is
believed to have remarkable sensitivity to T‐symmetry violating forces due to the unusual “egg‐like,”
asymmetric shape of the radium nucleus. To measure the EDM of this rare atom, lasers are used to cool
and trap radium at a temperature less than one thousandth of a degree above absolute zero, and its
rotation in an intense electric field is observed. At present, radium’s EDM is known to be less than
1.4×10‐23 e‐cm, about 300 trillion times smaller than that of a water molecule. This work will improve
experimental sensitivity more than 1000‐fold, thereby breaking new ground into the origins of T
violation beyond the Standard Model that could explain matter’s dominance in the universe. This
research will also study the possibility of performing a similar experiment on the molecule radium
monofluoride, which could further improve the experiment’s sensitivity by a factor of hundreds due to
the enormous electric fields that exist within a radium monofluoride molecule.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
8
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Scalable Control of Multidimensional Coherent Pulse Addition for High Average Power Ultrafast Lasers
Dr. Qiang Du, Electronics Research Scientist / Engineer
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
High average power (kilowatt range) ultrafast lasers are essential tools that support
fundamental science and applications that include, for example, laser‐driven plasma wakefield
acceleration toward a future high energy collider; high harmonic generation sources for attosecond
science; high repetition rate pump‐probe experiments at modern X‐ray Free Electron Laser facilities and
synchrotron light sources; medical proton accelerators and ion beam generation; and electromagnetic
radiation ranging from terahertz radiation to gamma rays. One promising path for creating such lasers
that also meets stringent requirements for ultrashort pulses and high repetition rate involves combining
many low energy parallel pulses coherently in the dimensions of time, space and wavelength into a
single, high‐energy pulse. Turning that concept into working lasers involves sophisticated, real‐time
control systems that depend on models that incorporate the physics of the relevant processes. This
research addresses the control needs associated with such novel laser architectures, leveraging the
world‐renowned Berkeley Lab engineering expertise on high precision digital radio frequency feedback
control systems and femtosecond optical synchronization. The objectives of this research are to design,
build and demonstrate a scalable distributed digital stabilization control system for robust
multidimensional coherent combining of ultrafast fiber lasers and to make the control system available
as a general toolbox for ultrafast optics control.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
9
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Understanding Severe Thunderstorms in the Central United States
Dr. Jiwen Fan, Senior Research Scientist
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)
Richland, WA 99352
Severe thunderstorms (STs) are an extreme form of storm clouds that produce large hail,
damaging winds and/or tornadoes, and torrential rainfall. There is increasing concern about how these
“deep convective” clouds are changing in occurrence and intensity. Earth system models (ESMs) are
used to understand these ST systems, yet two significant problems persist with the previous research:
(1) coarse resolution ESM simulations only account for the large‐scale environments, thus ignoring the
smaller, storm‐scale physical processes and how they feed back to the storm’s dynamics; and (2) there is
a built‐in assumption that the mechanisms controlling ST initiation will not significantly vary across
different Earth system states. This research addresses the two issues by answering major overarching
science questions: Q1. What are the significant interactions of storm dynamics with the specific
environmental factors of land surface, atmospheric particles, and extreme precipitation that affect ST
occurrence and intensity? How do urbanization and wildfires affect ST characteristics over the central
United States (CUS)? Q2. What are the overall effects of the compounding extremes on ST
characteristics over the CUS? The objective of this research is to improve the foundational
understanding of key physical processes that impact ST characteristics. First, the research will (a) focus
on the impacts of urbanization and wildfires and (b) explore the feedback of soil moisture resulting from
extreme precipitation to subsequent ST formation and intensity. Second, the research will provide a
comprehensive performance assessment of ST characteristics in a new, regionally refined ESM with
advanced formulations of dynamics, urbanization, and wildfire. Third, this research will provide a robust
understanding of how ST characteristics change in the CUS by considering the compounding extreme
events of droughts, extreme precipitation/flash floods, and urbanization. The grand deliverable of this
research is advanced understanding of ST activities in the past and future by investigating previously
unexplored links between STs and the evolving Earth system, which is affected by wildfires and
urbanization. The research will fill a significant gap in understanding the important physical and
dynamical interactions involving microphysics, atmospheric particles, the land surface, and precipitation
that affect ST characteristics.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
10
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Particle Acceleration in High‐Energy‐Density Plasmas: from Astrophysics to the Laboratory
Dr. Frederico Fiuza, Staff Scientist and Theory Group Leader
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Astrophysical plasmas, from solar flares to gamma‐ray bursts, are known to be good particle
accelerators. In spite of a wealth of observations and proposed models, clarifying the various
acceleration mechanisms in these extreme environments remains a long‐standing scientific challenge.
This arises from the complexity of the kinetic and highly nonlinear interplay between the plasma flows,
magnetic fields, and high‐energy particles, which operate at different scales. A transformative advance
in the understanding of the acceleration processes requires a combination of first principles simulations
and controlled experiments where numerical findings and theoretical models can be tested. This project
will use massively parallel kinetic simulations to explore the physics of particle acceleration and
magnetic field dynamics in plasmas, focusing on collisionless shocks and magnetic reconnection. It will
identify the processes responsible for the onset of particle acceleration and characterize in detail the
efficiency and spectral signatures of the particles. This understanding will then be used to design and
guide the interpretation of high‐energy‐density plasma experiments, where these processes can be
directly probed and connected, through appropriate scaling laws, with astrophysical and laboratory
plasma models.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
11
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Imaging Nanoscale Energy Transport and Conversion with Ultrafast Electron Microscopy
Dr. David J. Flannigan, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
Light‐matter interactions are central to innumerable fundamental phenomena and technologies.
These include charge‐carrier photoexcitation in semiconductors, molecular rearrangements during
photocatalytic reactions, and electromagnetic‐field enhancement in nanoscale materials. At the most
basic level, such interactions drive electron and nuclear motions, with the ultrafast coupling of photons,
charge carriers (electrons and holes), and atoms in the lattice often giving rise to unexpected and hard‐
to‐predict behaviors. The objective of this research is to elucidate how coherent, photo‐excited charge‐
carrier dynamics lead to the generation of initially commensurate atomic‐to‐nanoscale motions in both
semiconducting and metallic materials. Critical new insight into such behaviors will be generated using
the emerging technique of ultrafast electron microscopy. By combining a femtosecond laser with a
conventional transmission electron microscope, and by operating at unprecedentedly low instrument
repetition rates with maximum photoelectron‐collection efficiencies, behaviors occurring in previously
inaccessible experimental parameter space will be uncovered.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
12
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Determination of Vibrational Motions Driving Photoinduced Electron Transfer Reactions in Molecular
Crystals and Organic Thin Films
Dr. Renee R. Frontiera, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
The objective of this research is to develop an understanding of how molecular motions can be
used to control photoinduced chemical processes. The research aims to determine what interplay of
nuclear coordinates is most efficient in driving photoinduced charge transfers, a necessary first step in
most photovoltaic and photocatalytic devices. Systems such as molecular crystals or polycrystalline films
are promising for solar energy conversion, but the role that specific molecular structural features play in
driving charge transfer is currently unknown. To determine the mechanism of processes such as
ultrafast charge transfer, singlet fission, and long‐range transport, a structurally sensitive technique with
high time resolution is needed to monitor molecular structures along the reactive multidimensional
potential energy surfaces. This work will utilize femtosecond stimulated Raman microscopy to track the
nuclear dynamics driving charge transfer and to probe the effects of localized environments on long‐
range charge transport. By following the structural evolution of photoreactive molecular solids on the
timescale of their nuclear motion, this work will provide multidimensional reaction coordinates and
uncover molecular structure‐function relationships. This fundamental knowledge should ultimately
guide rational design of highly efficient photovoltaic and photocatalytic systems by determining how,
when, and where energy is lost during charge generation and transport.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
13
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Surface Ligand Effects on Energetics, Charge Transfer, and Stability at Interfaces Between Metal Halide
Perovskites and Organic Semiconductors
Dr. Kenneth R. Graham, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40526
The chemistry at organic‐inorganic interfaces plays a major role in determining the performance
of electronic and optoelectronic devices and the electronic and optical properties of organic‐inorganic
composite materials. Understanding, developing, and using surface chemistry is thus essential for
creating improved and novel materials and devices. Two families of materials that will benefit
tremendously from an improved fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry are organometal
halide perovskites and metal halide perovskites, abbreviated as (O)MHPs. These perovskites are
emerging as inexpensive materials that can be printed from solution to make efficient photovoltaic cells
for harvesting solar energy; light emitting diodes for energy efficient solid‐state lighting applications;
solid‐state lasers; and transistors. To realize the full potential of (O)MHPs, their surface chemistry and
interfacial properties must be better understood and utilized. This research revolves around
determining how the surface chemistry of (O)MHP thin films and nanoparticles influences optical
properties, charge transfer processes, energetics, and stability. The objectives of this research include
quantifying ligand binding strengths to (O)MHPs; determining how the ligands influence
photoluminescence properties, energetics, and charge transfer processes; determining how ligands
influence (O)MHP stability; developing strategies to stabilize (O)MHPs through surface ligands; and
developing mixed surface ligands to systematically manipulate energetics, charge transfer, and stability
at perovskite‐organic interfaces. Overall, this research will establish key information regarding the
surface chemistry of (O)MHPs that can be widely applied in both academics and industry to facilitate the
development of this exciting material class.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
14
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Scale‐Bridging Simulation of Magnetically Confined Fusion Plasmas
Dr. David L. Green, Staff Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Magnetically confined nuclear fusion represents the potential of clean, safe, and virtually
limitless power for the world. However, in contrast to nuclear fission, fusion has proven a far more
complex problem to solve. The spatial scales of the relevant physical processes span more than six
orders of magnitude, and the timescales span more than ten. Such multiscale processes, combined with
the extreme environment within a fusion device, make the physics inherently difficult to diagnose in an
experimental setting. As such, advancing our understanding of magnetically confined fusion plasmas has
leant heavily on the use of computer simulation where the available information is limited only by the
assumptions in the model, the uncertainty in the calculation, and the capabilities of the computer. With
the rapid advances in high performance computing, exascale computing platforms are slated to be
available in the US by 2024. With such a scale of computing capability comes the tremendous
opportunity to simulate a fusion device in its entirety from its fundamental describing equations,
possibly unraveling the essential fusion reactor physics we presently cannot predict from theory.
However, the multiscale nature of fusion plasmas makes realizing this potential challenging, and
significant research into computational methods that can effectively treat this wide range of scales is
needed if we are to fully exploit the coming wave of computing power. To achieve this, we will develop
a robust scale‐bridging method for fusion simulation based on implicit projective integration, combined
with online uncertainty quantification and sensitivity analysis and enabled by the massive on‐node
parallelism of modern supercomputers. Such a capability has the potential to significantly advance
scientific discovery in fusion plasma science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
15
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Advanced Ab Initio Methods for Nuclear Structure
Dr. Heiko Hergert, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
Exotic neutron‐rich nuclei have moved firmly into focus in nuclear physics research. The
structure of these nuclei is governed by a complex interplay of nuclear forces, strong many‐body
correlations, and continuum effects. It challenges our present understanding and has far‐reaching
implications, ranging from the creation of elements in the cosmos to tests of fundamental symmetries of
the Standard Model of Physics. The Department of Energy's Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) will
make it possible to produce and study many of these exotic nuclei for the first time under laboratory
conditions. The experimental efforts at FRIB and similar facilities go hand in hand with theory efforts to
develop a reliable description of exotic nuclei. The present project will develop advanced theoretical
methods for that purpose, with an emphasis on renormalization group ideas. It will leverage state‐of‐
the‐art computational techniques to handle the enormous memory requirements of nuclear forces and
the computational effort associated with the treatment of deformed, weakly bound nuclei. The goal is
to create a framework that can scale from day‐to‐day applications in support of experimental data
analysis to large‐scale simulations on leadership‐class computers.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
16
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Seeing Neutrinos: The Physics Potential of Photon Signals in DUNE
Dr. Alexander I. Himmel, Wilson Fellow
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, IL 60510
Discoveries in particle physics require state‐of‐the‐art detectors, and, if the particle you want to
study is the neutrino, those detectors must be built on an enormous scale. The flagship experiment of
the US high energy physics community in the next decade, the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment
(DUNE), is just such an experiment. It will be made up of four gigantic tanks, each larger than a jumbo
jet, filled with liquid argon. Even with these large detectors, catching a neutrino is rare, so we need to
learn as much as we can about each neutrino using the signature it leaves behind in the argon. One of
these signatures is the emission of particles of light (photons), and this research will build a foundation
that enables precise measurements using this signature. The photons do not travel freely once emitted;
they may scatter in a new direction or reflect off a wall in the detector, so the goal of this research is to
understand and correct for such effects. New software algorithms will be developed that take these
effects into account, and they will be tested in the prototype detectors now under construction. Then,
the optical properties of liquid argon itself will be measured directly to enable even more precise
understanding of the behavior of light in liquid argon detectors. The combination of these new
techniques with the data from direct measurements will allow the full potential of the photon signals in
DUNE to be realized.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
17
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Understanding the Chemical Complexity of Multi‐Component Systems: Uranium Polyoxometalates as
Nanosorbents
Dr. Amy E. Hixon, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Earth Sciences
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
The actinide series consists of the fifteen elements with atomic numbers 89‐103 (i.e., actinium
through lawrencium) and carries great societal importance due to the elements’ use in medicine, power
generation, national security, and nuclear waste management. Due to the complex nature of the
actinide elements and the relative difficulty of working with radioactive materials, research in actinide
chemistry has lagged far behind that of most other elements on the periodic table. To address current
knowledge gaps, this research will study the chemistry of the actinide elements uranium, neptunium,
plutonium, and americium. The thermodynamics and kinetics of the interactions of neptunium,
plutonium, and americium with nanometer‐sized uranyl peroxide cage clusters will be used to describe
bonding and structure (i.e., how electrons are shared in these unique complexes). This research
represents the first study that uses actinide materials as nanosorbents for other actinide elements. The
well‐defined structure of the uranyl peroxide cage cluster allows it to serve as an experimental model
for other metal oxide surfaces.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
18
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Probing Naturalness with Searches for Supersymmetric Higgs Partners at the Large Hadron Collider
Dr. Benjamin Hooberman, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61820
The 2012 discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland concluded the search for particles predicted by
the standard model (SM) of particle physics, which describes our understanding of the basic building
blocks of matter and their interactions at the most fundamental level. While the SM has been successful
in describing a wide variety of observations with excellent numerical accuracy, it is nevertheless
incomplete. It does not explain the nature of dark matter, which forms ~25% of the mass and energy of
the universe. Nor does it explain the difference in strength of fundamental forces or whether they are
different manifestations of a single force. To answer these questions, an extension to the SM
incorporating a new space‐time symmetry, Supersymmetry, has been proposed. We plan to search for
signatures of Supersymmetry, specifically partners of the Higgs boson, in data collected by the ATLAS (A
Toroidal LHC Apparatus) detector at the LHC. Upgrades to the ATLAS trigger system are pursued to
enable fast hardware‐based charged particle tracking, which will enhance the sensitivity of these
searches. A discovery would transform our understanding of the composition and fundamental laws of
the universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
19
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Proximity Effects and Topological Spin Currents in van der Waals Heterostructures
Dr. Benjamin M. Hunt, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Solids have traditionally been categorized in terms of their electrical conduction: conductors
such as aluminum conduct electricity; insulators such as wood and plastics do not; semiconductors such
as silicon show an intermediate behavior. In the last decade, this simple picture has been upended. It is
now well established that there is a class of solids in which the bulk of the solid is insulating yet the
surface of the solid can behave as a special type of conductor. These materials are known as topological
insulators (TIs), and the electronic states responsible for the conduction are known as topological
boundary modes. These topological boundary modes can have special properties not generally present
in other conductors such as a strong coupling between the spin and the charge current of electrons and
a protection against scattering that means the electrons can flow without dissipation of energy. The
scientific objective of this proposal is to investigate a new framework for the creation and manipulation
of topological boundary modes using the proximity effect in solids, where certain properties of one solid
can “leak” over a short distance into an adjacent solid. We will study proximity effects in vertical layered
structures composed of graphene and other two‐dimensional van der Waals crystals, known as “van der
Waals heterostructures.” These crystals exhibit magnetic order and strong spin‐orbit coupling, and we
will study the mechanisms by which these properties can be imprinted on the graphene layer and the
conditions under which topological boundary modes can be realized in graphene as a consequence of
these particular proximity effects.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
20
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Fundamental Study of Fatigue Crack Initiation at Grain Boundaries in Austenitic Stainless Steel
Dr. Josh Kacher, Assistant Professor
School of Materials Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
Fatigue damage under cyclic loading conditions accounts for the majority of failures in structural
metals, yet the underlying mechanisms dictating when and where failure initiates remain poorly
understood. This information is needed to guide the development of novel, fatigue resistant materials
and to better predict the lifetime and reliability of materials currently in use. The objective of this
project is to understand the evolution of the defect state leading to fatigue crack initiation. This includes
determining what local mechanisms drive the crack initiation process and how damage
accumulation/failure initiation is influenced by the surrounding microstructure. Defect
accumulation/failure initiation is inherently a multiscale process, with defect interactions occurring
across hundreds of microns but crack initiation occurring at the nanoscale. To access information across
these length scales, novel in situ scanning and transmission electron microscopy deformation
experiments capable of resolving the evolution of the local defect state and the accompanying stress
fields will be developed. The primary material that will be investigated in this research is 316L stainless
steel, a broadly‐used structural steel alloy, though many of the observed mechanisms are expected to
be applicable to a range of engineering alloys.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
21
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Large‐scale Deep Learning for Intelligent Networks
Dr. Mariam Kiran, Research Scientist/Network Engineer
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
This research project is focused on enabling the design of intelligent networks that allow
improved response, utilization, and reliability for exascale scientific workflows. The research pursues
building robust networks through the use of machine‐learning‐based approaches, cloud computing, and
software‐defined networks (SDN). For example, deep learning algorithms have recently been used to
process real‐time events and prevent accidents involving autonomous cars in highway traffic.
Analogously, the proposed research couples deep learning methods with SDN for predicting real‐time
network behavior and avoiding data traffic congestion or degraded network performance. Distributed
processing models such as cloud computing will be used to reduce learning time and improve real‐time
network reactions. As data demands from scientific communities rapidly increase, the proposed
research is timely for ensuring the development of reliable and robust networks with guaranteed high‐
throughput data transfer and uninterrupted performance.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
22
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Vegetation Dynamical Responses to Multivariate Extremes in the Western US
Dr. Charles D. Koven, Research Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
The Western US is experiencing an increase in a particular multivariate extreme: high
temperatures and reduced precipitation, which together combine to create hot droughts. At the same
time, forests are dying throughout the region, and their elevated mortality is likely driven by these
increasing extremes. This mortality will continue to drive changes to the composition of the Western US
forests and others throughout the northern hemisphere. Because forest compositional changes may
feed back to changes in the Earth system, both via biogeochemical and biophysical feedbacks, it is
critical to include these processes within Earth system models (ESMs). Such dynamics are currently not
permitted in most ESMs, including DOE’s Energy Exascale Earth System Model (E3SM), which do not
have active vegetation dynamics. The advent of new tools—such as the Functionally Assembled
Terrestrial Ecosystem Simulator (FATES)—allows us to mechanistically represent both the individual‐
level physiological responses to drought as well as the ecological community assembly that governs
long‐term vegetation dynamics. Applying these tools to understand and predict feedbacks requires
detailed testing against observations that span both physiological and vegetation dynamical processes.
The overarching goal of this effort is to understand how long‐term vegetation‐dynamical processes
interact with droughts in the Western US by using the recent California drought as a test case for
examining multivariate droughts and by exploring how these dynamics are projected to occur at longer
timescales and larger spatial scales in the future. Several sets of observations suggest that the forest
structure in California is undergoing rapid change and make it an ideal test case for mortality‐driven
vegetation dynamics: the sizes, trait composition, and number of trees have shifted over the 20th
century; tree mortality rates are increasing rapidly over recent decades; and the recent drought shows a
particularly localized pattern of extremely high mortality that is suggestive of a biome shift. These
observations will allow benchmarks of transient vegetation dynamics, which can be used to test dynamic
vegetation models. We will use these events, as well as physiological measurements from a network of
eddy‐flux towers across an elevation transect in California’s Sierra Nevada as well as airborne remote
sensing data as tests of FATES, a modular, demographic, dynamic vegetation model for use in the E3SM
model. Once tested for these ecosystems, we will then use FATES within the coupled land‐atmosphere
system to explore the role of vegetation dynamics in modulating land‐atmosphere feedbacks on slow
timescales. We will seek to understand the role of extremes versus mean‐state changes in governing
the rate of vegetation dynamical changes under changing climate and the roles of vegetation dynamics
in driving feedbacks to both the mean state and extremes of the atmospheric state.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
23
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Unique Optical Excitations in Topological Insulators
Dr. Stephanie Law, Clare Boothe Luce Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University Of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716
The overall objective of this research is to understand how light interacts with topological
insulator (TI) films and layered structures. Unlike normal materials, the electrons in TI films are trapped
at the top and bottom surfaces of the film. These electrons have unusual properties, including low mass
and high velocity. Light shining on these trapped electrons will excite electron density waves, called
plasmons, which inherit the unusual properties of the electrons. This project aims to understand how
these plasmons interact with each other and how the plasmon properties change as the film dimensions
change. By controlling the physical properties of the films, the optical response of the film can also be
controlled. In addition to single TI films, the project will also investigate the properties of stacks of TI
films layered with normal insulating films. Stacking these materials results in multiple layers of trapped
electrons whose plasmons can interact in ever more complex ways. After these interactions are
understood, we can begin to engineer complex TI structures to obtain designer optical phenomena in
the far‐infrared and THz, wavelength ranges of interest for environmental monitoring and chemical
sensing. This research directly addresses DOE Grand Challenges, including understanding how
properties of matter emerge from complex electronic correlations and learning how to control these
properties, as well as the mission of the Basic Energy Sciences program to understand and control
matter at the electronic/atomic level.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
24
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Green's Function Methods for Multiphysics Simulations
Dr. Lin Lin, Assistant Professor
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
Green's function methods are important tools in the numerical solution of partial differential
equations. This research aims to establish Green's function methods that can enable multiphysics
simulations such as crack propagation in materials and the design of next‐generation batteries. This
research will tackle the challenging question of how to couple the quantum and classical physics
descriptions for the overall multiphysics system. The key mathematical difficulty is to properly
formulate the boundary condition for the region described by quantum physics. In order to overcome
such difficulty, this research will pursue the approach based on Dirichlet‐to‐Neumann maps, which in
principle allows the quantum and classical regions to be coupled in an exact way. The key ingredient is
to construct Dirichlet‐to‐Neumann maps in an efficient, accurate, and versatile manner. The proposed
work will lead to the development of efficient Green's function methods that are ideally suited for
predictive multiphysics simulations on massively parallel computers.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
25
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Advancing Polymeric Gas Separation Membranes through Molecular Engineering
Dr. Brian K. Long, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
The industrial scale separation and purification of chemical mixtures accounts for approximately
10‐15% of the world's energy consumption. Because of this, methods by which these chemical
separations can be accomplished in a more efficient and cost‐effective manner are highly desired. One
particular technology that has shown tremendous promise is the use of polymeric gas separation
membranes, which have been targeted for a variety of applications including the separation of light‐
hydrocarbons, the purification of natural gas, and the separation of harmful greenhouse gases such as
carbon dioxide. However, despite broad interest, the industrial‐scale implementation of gas separation
membranes has remained relatively limited due to a variety of scientific and practical challenges. One
such scientific challenge is an overall lack of understanding regarding how molecular‐level hierarchical
controls may be harnessed to promote membrane performance. To bridge this scientific gap, this
research project aims to synthesize and evaluate polymeric gas separation membranes possessing
precisely defined structure at the monomeric, polymeric, and microphase levels. More specifically,
detailed investigations will be conducted in an effort to 1) better understand how interactions between
polymeric materials and penetrant gases may be systematically tailored, 2) develop a detailed
relationship of how precise block copolymer composition and microphase separation dictate membrane
performance, and 3) better understand how advanced molecular and polymer architectures may be
used to influence gas transport. These membranes will be evaluated using a barrage of techniques,
which will inform the systematic design of subsequent membrane generations. The information
obtained herein will strengthen the scientific community's fundamental understanding and may
facilitate the development of broadly applicable, highly efficient membranes for gaseous separations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
26
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Measurements at the Facility for Experiments of Nuclear Reactions in Stars (FENRIS)
Dr. Richard L. Longland, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
Nuclear reactions in stars have transformed the universe since the Big Bang, turning hydrogen
and helium into the heavier elements we see around us today. These reactions fuel a star throughout its
lifetime. These reactions fuel a star throughout its lifetime. When the star burns out, its ashes are
ejected into space to enrich the next generation of stars. Thus, to understand the origin of the elements
in the cosmos, we must learn how stars burn their fuel. In this stellar burning, the rates of nuclear
reactions are key. The rates can, in principle, be determined by recreating the reactions in the
laboratory. At the low energies characteristic of stellar burning, however, many of the reactions occur
too rarely to be measured. Novel, indirect measurements must be used. A research program will be
developed to perform such measurements, primarily using the Facility for Experiments of Nuclear
Reactions in Stars (FENRIS), a charged‐particle spectrometer at the Triangle Universities Nuclear
Laboratory (TUNL). At FENRIS, high‐energy nuclear reactions coupled with theoretical models will be
used to ascertain the rate of the low‐energy nuclear reactions occurring in stars. Detailed analysis of the
data will reveal the structure of nuclei and how they affect stellar burning. High‐energy photons will be
used as a different lens with which to examine these nuclei at another facility ‐ the High Intensity
gamma‐ray Source – to supplement the measurements at FENRIS. In parallel to these experimental
efforts, theoretical tools will be developed to identify which nuclear reactions are most critical for
understanding stars, helping set the priorities for future measurements. This complementary suite of
experiments and theoretical calculations will be used to answer one of the key questions facing the
physics community: How did visible matter come into being and how did it evolve?
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
27
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
First‐Principles Tools for Nonadiabatic Attosecond Dynamics in Materials
Dr. Kenneth Lopata, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Louisiana State University and A&M College
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
Controlling materials at the level of electrons and characterizing and controlling matter far‐
from‐equilibrium are two ongoing grand challenges in solid‐state science. Successfully addressing these
challenges has the potential to revolutionize fields ranging from energy storage to conversion of light
into electrical and chemical energy. In particular, the mechanisms of ultrafast light‐induced changes in
solids are poorly understood at the atomic level. These dynamics occur at the attosecond (billionth of a
billionth of a second) time scale and involve a complex interplay of electron motion coupled to the
movement of the atoms in a crystal lattice. The objective of this research is to develop computer
simulation tools for predicting the ultrafast response of materials subjected to intense pulses of light.
These tools are crucial for understanding the underlying mechanisms and for interpreting and
motivating attosecond experiments. First‐principles approaches for this type of dynamics, especially for
photochemistry‐like processes near dopants and defects, are lacking. This project will develop density
functional theory‐based methods for attosecond electron/nuclear dynamics in semiconductors and
insulators under the influence of high‐intensity and/or high‐energy (X‐ray) laser pulses. These will be
validated against experiments and will enable computation of optical breakdown, electron/lattice
couplings, excited‐state lifetimes, and the origins of non‐thermal damage.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
28
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Discovering Dark Energy, Dark Matter, and Neutrino Properties with Cosmic Structure
Dr. Marilena LoVerde, Assistant Professor
C. N. Yang Institute for Theoretical Physics and Department of Physics and Astronomy
SUNY Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
Maps of the distribution of galaxies, or the cosmic large‐scale structure, provide information
about the past several billion years of cosmic history. These maps have the power to inform several of
the largest scientific puzzles driving the Department of Energy's High Energy Physics program: the
neutrino mass scale, properties of dark matter, the existence of new particles, and the mechanism
responsible for cosmic acceleration. This research will develop the theory of structure formation in the
presence of cosmic neutrinos and other novel types of matter. This work will ensure the exploitation of
the full power of the cosmic‐structure data. The primary goal is to ensure that modeling uncertainties
are not an obstacle to detecting the neutrino mass scale and other cosmological parameters with next‐
generation experiments. A secondary goal is to anticipate the possibility of new physics by developing
the astrophysical phenomenology of novel dark‐matter and cosmic‐acceleration scenarios. This research
will produce new tools to study neutrinos, hidden components of dark matter, dynamical dark energy,
and structure formation in the Universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
29
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Mechanistic Studies of a Primitive Homolog of Nitrogenase Involved in Coenzyme F430 Biosynthesis
Dr. Steven O. Mansoorabadi, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
Auburn University
Auburn, AL 36849
Methyl‐coenzyme M reductase (MCR) is the key enzyme in the biological formation and
anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM). Methane is the major component of natural gas. Given the
abundance of natural gas reserves in remote areas, there is great current interest in a scalable bio‐based
process for the conversion of methane to liquid fuel and other high‐value chemicals. MCR holds much
promise for use in such a methane bioconversion strategy. However, MCR cannot currently be produced
in an active form in an industrially viable strain due to the lack of genetic and biochemical information
about the formation of its unique nickel‐containing coenzyme, F430. The coenzyme F430 biosynthesis
(Cfb) pathway was recently elucidated, and the key step was found to involve an unprecedented
reductive cyclization reaction that converts the intermediate Ni‐sirohydrochlorin a,c‐diamide to the
immediate precursor of F430, 15,173‐seco‐F430‐173‐acid. This remarkable transformation, which
involves a six‐electron ring reduction, cyclization of an acetamide side chain to form a ϒ‐lactam ring, and
the formation of seven stereocenters, is catalyzed by a primitive homolog of nitrogenase (CfbCD).
Nitrogenase is a two‐component metalloenzyme that catalyzes the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)‐
dependent reduction of nitrogen gas to ammonia and hydrogen gas (biological nitrogen fixation), a
reaction of great industrial importance. Homologs of nitrogenase are also involved in the biosynthesis of
the photosynthetic pigments chlorophyll and bacteriochlorophyll. Phylogenetic analysis of the CfbCD
complex suggests that it is representative of a more ancient lineage of the nitrogenase superfamily, and
a thorough investigation of its structure and function is likely to shed light on the mechanisms and
evolution of these important metalloenzymes. Moreover, a detailed understanding of the mechanism of
the CfbCD complex may be exploited for the production of MCR for use in methane bioconversion.
Towards these goals, the objectives of this research are focused on 1) the identification of physiological
electron donors and in vivo coenzyme F430 synthesis, 2) the analysis of the iron‐sulfur centers,
structure, and oligomerization state changes, and 3) the characterization of transient intermediates and
the intercomponent electron transfer of the CfbCD complex.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
30
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Attosecond Light‐Field Control of High‐Density Plasmas
Dr. Julia M. Mikhailova, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
This project explores transient micro‐sized high‐energy‐density plasmas formed in the
interaction of focused multi‐terawatt laser beams with solid targets. According to theoretical
predictions, relativistic electrons in such plasmas may emit high‐order‐harmonic soft‐x‐ray radiation
more powerful and of shorter durations than that of the current fourth‐generation free‐electron laser
sources. This radiation may serve as an informative probe of nonlinear plasma dynamics with sub‐
femtosecond precision and open the path for high‐temporal‐resolution x‐ray diagnostics with
applications in plasma and atomic physics, material science, biology and medicine. This project aims at
characterizing and controlling the properties of high‐order‐harmonic emission from dense plasmas
driven by accurately tailored light waveforms.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
31
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
High‐Gradient Accelerators at THz Frequencies
Dr. Emilio A. Nanni, Associate Staff Scientist
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Advanced particle accelerators are enabling technologies for the exploration of high energy
physics. Successful accelerator technology for future particle colliders must efficiently accelerate beams
and rapidly increase particle energy using intense electromagnetic fields to provide high accelerating
gradients. One approach to achieving accelerating gradients orders of magnitude above present
capabilities is to dramatically increase the operational frequency into the Terahertz (THz) range. This
program will explore new accelerating structures designed to withstand high gradients, power them
with the newest generation of THz sources, and lay the foundation for THz accelerator technology. This
research aims to answer fundamental questions about the limits of accelerating gradients and to
improve understanding for the role of frequency, pulse length and stored energy in plasma breakdown.
This knowledge will also provide feedback to the design of lower frequency accelerators, potentially
improving their performance. Compact, high‐gradient THz accelerators also hold the promise of having
an immediate broad impact with many potential applications of relevance to biologists, chemists and
physicists investigating ultrafast processes and to physicians developing new tools for medical therapy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
32
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Modeling Charge Transfer Excitation with Variation After Response Quantum Monte Carlo
Dr. Eric W. Neuscamman, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
Processes that move electrons between molecules play crucial roles in battery technology, light
harvesting, liquid fuels production, and many other high‐priority areas of energy science. This research
will develop high‐fidelity models for electron transfer by combining theoretical chemistry, the
mathematics of random processes, and the Department of Energy’s unparalleled infrastructure for high
performance computing. Like custom‐tailored suits, these models will optimize wave functions for
individual processes with unprecedented precision. The resulting efficiency will permit reliable
predictions to be made at technologically relevant length scales, a critical capability that is lacking in
current models. In the same way that computational models of fluid dynamics have revolutionized the
design of engines and aircraft, this research will help support a revolution in the rational design of
molecular scale technologies for energy science.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
33
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Symmetric Convex Sets: Theory, Algorithms, and Application
Dr. James Ostrowski, Assistant Professor
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
The past few decades have seen rapid growth in the types of problems that can be solved using
computers. Improved algorithms, combined with improved hardware, have allowed optimization to
become a ubiquitous tool used in a range of areas such as transportation and power systems. Even
though it is routine to solve extremely large optimization instances, one will occasionally come across a
problem that is considerably difficult to solve, even if the instance is very small. A hypothesis of this
work is that these difficult instances tend to be highly symmetric. By developing tools that exploit this
symmetric structure, one will be able to easily solve optimization problems considered intractable and
improve the computational speeds by orders of magnitude. The challenge of solving optimization
problems will thus be transformed by changing a large part of the work to one of seeking symmetry and
then exploiting it.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
34
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Searching for Parton Energy Loss in Quark‐Gluon Plasma Droplets
Dr. Dennis V. Perepelitsa, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80303
Very high energy collisions of nuclei at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) create a Quark‐Gluon Plasma (QGP), a high‐temperature, high‐density form of
matter in which quarks and gluons, collectively called partons, are freed from their normal state of being
bound in protons and neutrons. The formation of a QGP is understood to have several experimental
indications, including: (1) correlations in how the particles produced in the collision are distributed in
angle, attributed to a QGP that can “flow” with near perfect fluidity, and (2) the degradation of high‐
energy collections of particles, called “jet quenching”, attributed to a QGP that attenuates any partons
that attempt to pass through it. Remarkably, recent measurements of flow‐like correlations in much
smaller collisions of protons and deuterons with nuclei suggest that a droplet, or small region, of QGP is
formed even in these systems. However, the expected accompanying signature of jet quenching has yet
to be observed. Given the complications in applying traditional observables to these small systems, a
search for jet quenching requires the examination of individual events, such as those with a produced
photon and particle jet pair. In these events, the photon escapes the collision zone without interacting
and provides an estimate for the energy of the balancing partons before they pass through the QGP. For
this reason, photon‐tagged measurements have long been recognized by the theoretical and
experimental communities as a “golden channel” probe of these effects. Through the analysis of high‐
luminosity data recently collected by the ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC Apparatus) detector at the LHC and that
to be collected with the sPHENIX (super Pioneering High Energy Nuclear Interaction eXperiment)
detector at RHIC, this research seeks to determine how high‐energy partons are affected by the varying
shapes and sizes of QGP regions they encounter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
35
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
A Continuous Model of Discrete Scientific Data
Dr. Tom Peterka, Computer Scientist
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Lemont, IL 60439
The Advanced Scientific Computing Research (ASCR) mission to advance science through high‐
performance computing depends on managing, analyzing, and visualizing data. While our computational
capability to generate more raw data grows, our ability to process the resulting quantity and diversity—
to store, transform, and to draw scientific conclusions from scientific datasets—is lagging. Rethinking
the way that scientific data are represented is one way to break out of this spiral. This project explores a
fundamentally different kind of data model that will conserve resources while improving data
understanding and sharing. The approach being taken recasts discrete scientific data with continuous,
functional approximations that will be more efficient to communicate, store, and analyze than the
original form. The new model, which can accommodate many types of scientific datasets on high‐
performance supercomputing architectures, provides for file size compression and facilitates analytical
reasoning not possible before. Moreover, the accuracy of the data model will always be known and
guaranteed. In addition, the new model preserves geometric, visual, and statistical properties, making it
directly usable for analysis.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
36
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Probing Condensed Phase Structure and Dynamics in Hierarchical Zeolites and Nanosheets for
Catalytic Upgradation of Biomass
Dr. Neeraj Rai, Assistant Professor
Dave C. Swalm School of Chemical Engineering
Mississippi State University
Starkville, MS 39762
A difficult scientific challenge is the understanding of complex reactions at the molecular level in
systems characterized by multiscale collective coupling across time and space. In this project, an
example of such systems will be considered by pursuing the hypothesis that interactions of oligomers,
solvents, and active sites can be tailored by suitable choices of solvent and of solid‐acid catalyst pore
architecture to promote chemical transformations during catalytic conversion of biomass. The
architecture is determined by the choice of hierarchical zeolites, which provide large channels for
macromolecule diffusion and small pores for catalysis. A multiscale computational approach will be used
to elucidate physical and chemical interactions across multiple spatial and temporal scales. We will use
advanced first principles Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations along with electronic
structure calculations to answer fundamental scientific questions pertinent to acid‐catalyzed hydrolysis
and hydrogenolysis of cellulose and lignin in ordered mesoporous zeolitic structures. One outcome will
be a better understanding of the interactions of reactant and solid acid catalysts in the presence of
solvents, enabling rational design of catalytic systems that can upgrade biomass in a selective and
energy efficient manner. Another outcome will be the development of sampling tools essential to
detangle interactions in complex, reactive phenomena.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
37
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Fundamental QCD Theory and Transverse Momentum Dependent Physics
Dr. Ted C. Rogers, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA 23508
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the fundamental theory of the strong nuclear interaction. It
lies at the root of the interactions between the elementary particles (quarks and gluons) that are
ultimately responsible for the structure of particles like protons and neutrons that form ordinary matter.
However, the precise mechanisms by which quarks and gluons interact to form the particles seen in
nature remain mysterious and only partially understood. A major difficulty to forming a complete
picture comes from the fact that QCD has dramatically different characteristics over large and small
spacetime scales. Over small scales, quarks and gluons couple only loosely, so small‐coupling theoretical
techniques (called “perturbative”) predict patterns of quark and gluon radiation with very high accuracy.
By contrast, interactions over large scales involve a very strong coupling and are characterized by the
types of QCD interactions (called “non‐perturbative”) responsible for binding quarks and gluons tightly
together. In high‐energy QCD experiments, an intricate combination of large‐scale and small‐scale
interactions is responsible for physical observables like scattering cross‐sections. Therefore, one of the
keys to understanding how QCD gives rise to measured physical quantities in nature is the ability to
disentangle these large‐scale and small‐scale interactions in theoretical calculations. A prescription for
doing this is called a factorization theorem. A successful factorization theorem is the critical bridge
between perturbative calculations of small‐scale physics, non‐perturbative calculations of large‐scale
physics, and experimental data. Experimental strategies continue to focus, with ever‐greater detail, on
the precise momentum and energy distributions of final states produced in high‐energy particle
collisions. At the same time, the associated factorization theorems necessary to interpret these data and
extract meaningful information about fundamental QCD interactions become increasingly subtle. This
project will improve existing factorization theorems to the point that they can be used most effectively
in the future analysis and interpretation of transverse momentum dependent (TMD) observables. New
theoretical techniques will be developed where needed, while incomplete aspects of established
factorization theorems will be addressed. The outcome will be a unified factorization framework for
combining non‐perturbative theoretical calculations consistently with perturbative QCD calculations,
such that descriptions of fundamental quark and gluon interactions can be meaningfully tested against
TMD observables.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
38
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Program Generators for Exascale and Beyond
Dr. Tiark Rompf, Assistant Professor
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
Program generators are an appealing solution to the problem of automatically producing high‐
performance libraries and applications for specific computational platforms from high‐level descriptions
of scientist intentions. When platforms are upgraded with new hardware architecture features to be
supported, appropriate extensions to the generator should enable efficient code to be readily
regenerated. Very few program generators currently exist because they are difficult to build. The main
difficulty stems from the problem of designing an extensible approach to perform all the optimizations
that compilers are unable to do. Furthermore, the actual implementation of the program generators
often results in ad‐hoc collections of stand‐alone programs that are hard to extend, reuse, or further
develop. The main research objective is to devise programming models and supporting tools that greatly
simplify the development of specialized high‐performance program generators. Success in this research
direction will have a transformative impact on how exascale software is developed for DOE mission‐
critical science and engineering applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
39
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Dark Energy Constraints from Weak Gravitational Lensing in the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
(LSST)
Dr. Michael D. Schneider, Research Scientist
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL)
Livermore, CA 94551
The 2011 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for the discovery of the accelerating expansion of
the universe, called “dark energy,” that has no explanation by known physical phenomena.
Measurements of weak gravitational lensing (i.e., the distortion of galaxy images by the gravity of
cosmic structures) made with the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) have the potential to
distinguish the ‘cosmological constant’ hypothesis for dark energy from modified gravity hypotheses.
However, the LSST measurements are limited by systematics rather than statistics because of the large
data volume. Weak lensing is dominated by the noise from the unknown distribution of intrinsic galaxy
shapes. We will advance our previously demonstrated ‘hierarchical’ Bayesian algorithms to significantly
reduce this noise and simultaneously include more features of galaxy images (e.g., sizes, fluxes). The
LSST will collect on the order of 1,000 distinct images for every source in the ten‐year, 18,000 square
degree survey. Combining these images for precision lensing measurements is an as‐yet unsolved
problem. We have demonstrated a massively parallelizable algorithm to optimally combine galaxy image
measurements, including uncertainty propagation, for lensing shear inference. We will develop a
pipeline for this algorithm with a goal of delivering a primary image reduction tool for the LSST survey.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
40
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Advancement of Hybrid Fluid‐Kinetic Modeling Efforts for HEDP and ICF Science
Dr. Adam B. Sefkow, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
Increasingly complex high‐energy‐density physics (HEDP) and inertial confinement fusion (ICF)
experiments at the nation’s three flagship HEDP facilities—the Omega Laser Facility, the National
Ignition Facility, and the Z Pulsed Power Facility—are advancing the limits of our fundamental scientific
understanding of matter at extreme conditions. Multi‐physics radiation‐hydrodynamics simulation
capabilities are continuously developed and improved to help explain and predict the dynamics of
matter in laser‐driven and pulsed‐power‐driven experiments over a large range of temporal and spatial
scales and from the solid to plasma states. In fact, scientists conducting these experiments increasingly
rely on such simulations since they are useful and often necessary to help design and execute highly
integrated experiments as well as to analyze and interpret the collected data. While progress has been
made toward the development of robust and reliable models with predictive capability, more work
remains since significant amounts of the data acquired at the facilities are not easily interpreted by
radiation‐hydrodynamics simulations alone. The science base in support of HEDP and ICF will be
strengthened by the development of a particle‐based hybrid fluid‐kinetic code named CHIMERA, which
will be benchmarked to a wide range of experimental data from lasers and pulsed‐power accelerators.
To self‐consistently construct the model, particle‐based fluid dynamics algorithms (macroscopic and
short‐range ensemble effects) are added to an electromagnetic and kinetic particle code (microscopic
and long‐range discrete particle effects) since interactions between dynamically co‐existing fluid and
kinetic particles can be treated straightforwardly. The combination of fluid and kinetic treatments into a
single simulation framework with electromagnetic fields while using sophisticated material and laser
interaction models is an area with significant innovative research opportunities. The hybrid method
naturally allows the retention of many effects that are beyond either of the individual traditional
modeling methods alone. Therefore, since the new hybrid paradigm wields the benefits of both
approaches, it will either provide new physics insight into areas wherein confidence is low (for problems
where the physics of both are important) or reinforce areas wherein confidence is higher (for problems
where one or the other approach is valid).
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
41
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Unraveling Catalytic Pathways for Low Temperature Oxidative Methanol Synthesis from Methane
Dr. Sanjaya D. Senanayake, Associate Chemist
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
Upton, NY 11973
There is a need for processes to convert abundant natural gas resources into higher value
chemicals and fuels. Our objective is to study and improve catalysts for the direct catalytic conversion of
methane (CH ), the primary component of natural gas, into methanol (CH OH), a useful intermediate for
4 3
chemicals and fuels production. This research builds on the recent discovery of a single step catalytic
process for this reaction at low temperatures and pressures using inexpensive earth abundant catalysts.
The reaction promises to be more economical than current multi‐step processes, but improvements in
performance are needed. We will study structures and reactions on well‐defined model surfaces and
powders, accompanied by theoretical modeling, to unravel surface reaction pathways. In particular, we
will identify key catalyst features that activate the stable methane molecule through ‘soft’ oxidative
activation of C‐H bonds with oxygen (O ) and water (H O) co‐reactants in order to enable selective
2 2
conversion to the desirable methanol product. The project will exploit unique capabilities to study
catalysts in reaction environments (in situ) using X‐ray spectroscopy, electron imaging, and other in situ
methods at Brookhaven National Laboratory, particularly at the National Synchrotron Light Source II
(NSLS‐II). The goal is to establish and experimentally validate design principles for improved catalysts for
single step conversion to methanol and, more broadly, to enable controlled oxidative activation of C‐H
bonds.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
42
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Bringing Inorganic Carbon to Life: Developing Model Metalloenzymes for C1 Conversion Reactions
Dr. Hannah S. Shafaat, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
A primordial metabolic pathway for the conversion of inorganic carbon into cellular biomass
uses a large, nickel‐containing enzyme called carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH)/acetyl coenzyme
A synthase (ACS). This system fixes carbon dioxide (CO ) into carbon monoxide (CO) at the CODH site.
2
The carbon monoxide is then used to generate acetyl coenzyme A, a biological building block, through a
key carbon‐carbon bond forming step at the nickel site in ACS. Despite the significance of these
processes in the context of energy conversion, the fundamental chemistry underlying these
transformations has remained elusive, in part due to the complexity of the natural enzyme. To better
understand the principles governing these biological processes, which represent one‐carbon (C1)
activation reactions, this project will develop functional models of CODH and ACS based on
modifications to a small metalloprotein scaffold. Comprehensive characterization of these systems using
advanced spectroscopic and biophysical techniques will reveal key elements responsible for conferring
high levels of activity to the model systems, and this then can provide us with key insights into the
mechanisms of the natural enzymes. Moreover, the principles learned from this research can be used to
guide design of robust catalysts for efficient conversion of CO and CO into liquid fuels.
2
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
43
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
First‐Principles Understanding of Optical Excitations within Low‐Dimensional Materials
Dr. Sahar Sharifzadeh, Assistant Professor
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
An important unanswered question for the design of new solar energy conversion materials is
how to control the motion of bound electron and hole pairs (excitons) formed upon optical excitation.
The objective of this project is to utilize first‐principles computational approaches to understand
excitons within two‐dimensional monolayers and heterostructures with the ultimate goal of designing
new materials by modifying the chemical and physical structure on the nanoscale. The PI will study the
thinnest possible materials that can be assembled, one‐atom thick layers. These are candidates for
next‐generation energy conversion devices. Controlling the nature and migration properties of excitons
is a challenge because of the complex relationship between electrons, lattice vibrations, defects,
disorder, and interfaces. Current theoretical models aimed at understanding these phenomena are
elaborate and complex or highly empirical, hindering the ability to predict and design new materials.
Performing highly accurate density functional theory and many‐body perturbation theory calculations,
the PI will determine how to decompose these complexities into simple, tunable parameters that
explain the effect of electron‐electron and electron‐phonon interactions on excitons. These studies will
reveal patterns in material structure that will be used to propose physically motivated rules for more
efficient energy conversion mechanisms.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
44
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Hidden Sectors from Cosmos to Colliders
Dr. Jessie F. Shelton, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61820
The existence of some kind of particle‐like dark matter constituting the dominant form of matter
in our universe has been solidly established through multiple lines of evidence based on gravitational
interactions between dark and visible matter. There is no evidence ‐ as yet ‐ that dark matter interacts
with the Standard Model in any other way. This research program investigates discovery strategies for a
broad and general class of hidden‐sector dark matter theories where the present‐day abundance of dark
matter is determined by interactions among multiple dark fields and is not directly related to its
interactions with the Standard Model. However, the possible cosmological histories of these dark
sectors still depend on the size and structure of their interactions with the Standard Model: for example,
are the interactions between the dark sector and the Standard Model ever strong enough to bring the
two sectors into thermal equilibrium in the early universe? Is the lightest dark state stable, or does it
decay to Standard Model particles? This research will systematically address these and related
questions, establishing links between dark sectors’ cosmic history and their interactions with the
Standard Model and thereby providing new avenues to search for dark matter and other dark fields. It
will also explore the important and complementary role played by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in
furthering the search for dark sectors at the energy frontier, particularly through measuring properties
of the Higgs boson. As the LHC continues to take data, searches for exotic decays of the Higgs boson and
particles with macroscopic lifetimes will provide some of the most exciting avenues for discovery.
Combining new search strategies at the LHC with new cosmic motivations for signals of dark sectors, this
research aims to substantially extend prospects for understanding the origin and nature of dark matter
by leveraging results from intensity, cosmic, and energy frontiers.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
45
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Extreme‐Scale Stochastic Optimization and Simulation via Learning‐Enhanced Decomposition and
Parallelization
Dr. Siqian Shen, Assistant Professor
Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Stochastic optimization and simulation models are common in designing and operating complex
service and engineering systems. Significant computational challenges may arise due to the use of high‐
dimensional data and the sequential nature of decisions made in response to newly revealed data. The
objective of this research is to develop an efficient and unified framework that integrates machine
learning with discrete optimization and risk‐averse modeling. The models we consider represent a broad
class of complex decision‐making problems, where 0‐1 or continuous decisions are made before and/or
after knowing multiple and potentially correlated sources of uncertainties. Machine learning will be
used to dynamically decide and prioritize computational procedures such as cut generation, branching,
and bounding of the optimal objective. Furthermore, the research will shed new light on the traditional
decomposition algorithms for high‐performance computing. Application examples include distributed
computer server scheduling, sensor deployment for monitoring critical infrastructures, and other
decision‐making capabilities arising from DOE missions in energy, environment, and national security.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
46
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Strange Mesons and Gluonic Excitations
Dr. Justin Stevens, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
The College of William and Mary
Williamsburg, VA 23187
In the standard model of particle physics, the interactions between the fundamental
constituents of nuclear matter, quarks and gluons, are governed by the theory of Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD). A central goal of nuclear physics is to understand how hadrons, such as protons
and neutrons, are formed from these underlying quark and gluon degrees of freedom. A hadron is
primarily constructed from three quarks or a quark‐antiquark pair; however, the theory of QCD allows
for much more exotic configurations. One of the predicted exotic configurations is known as a hybrid
meson, which contains an excited gluonic field in addition to the usual quark‐antiquark pair. This project
aims to search for and study these gluonic excitations using the Gluonic Excitation (GlueX) experiment at
Jefferson Lab in Newport News, VA. The discovery potential of the experiment will be significantly
extended by studying the quark flavor composition of the meson spectrum through the completion and
use of an enhanced detector to identify mesons containing strange quarks. The unprecedented
statistical precision of the data collected at GlueX will allow us to search for a pattern of light‐quark
hybrid mesons, providing new insight into the interactions that bind the fundamental quarks and gluons
into the hadrons we observe in nature.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
47
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Rational Selection of Transition‐Metal Oxide Electrocatalysts from Structure‐Electronic Structure‐
Activity Relations: The Role of Defects, Strain, and Sub‐Surface Layering
Dr. Jin Suntivich, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
Electrochemical reactions between carbon monoxide, water, and oxygen can produce electricity
and create high‐valued chemicals. A properly designed catalyst will increase the speed and selectivity of
these electrochemical reactions, making them more efficient and cost effective. The objective of this
research is to establish scientific principles to enable the design of top‐performing electrochemical
catalysts. This research focuses on transition‐metal oxides, a class of proven high‐performing catalysts,
whose surface atomic arrangements that are responsible for performance (‘active sites’) are not well
understood. This project uses single‐crystalline transition‐metal oxides, prepared through advanced
thin‐film deposition with atomic‐level precision, to reveal the nature of the active sites. Oxygen
reduction and carbon‐monoxide oxidation, the efficiency‐limiting electrochemical processes in
reformate and syngas fuel cells, will be evaluated for their defects, strain, and sub‐surface layering. By
revealing how these structural variables affect performance, molecular‐level mechanisms and scientific
principles will emerge that enable the design of top‐performing catalysts. The final aim is to connect
structural variables and chemical functionalities to provide a convergence between the microscopic
degrees of freedom and macroscopic catalytic properties in transition‐metal oxides. This final
component will establish a design route toward future high‐performing catalysts for fuel and chemical
production from both fossil and renewable feedstocks.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
48
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Awakening the Sleeping Giant: Multi‐omics Enabled Quantification of Microbial Controls on
Biogeochemical Cycles in Permafrost Ecosystems
Dr. Neslihan Taş Baas, Research Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
Large expanses of permanently frozen soils, called permafrost, are found in the Earth's polar
regions. Arctic soils store large amounts of biomass and water from warmer periods in the history of the
Earth that became preserved in permafrost during cooling and glaciation events. Permafrost soils
contain a broad diversity of cold‐adapted microbes, whose metabolic activity depends on environmental
factors such as temperature changes that cause cycles of freezing and thawing in the soil. Microbial
metabolism leads to decomposition of soil organic matter, substantially impacting the cycling of
nutrients and significantly affecting the arctic landscape. However, the relationship between permafrost
microbial properties and biogeochemical cycles is poorly understood. This project will use field
experiments, laboratory manipulations, and multi‐omics approaches to examine how microbial
processes, biogeochemical transformations, and hydrology interact during permafrost thaw in different
sites in Alaska in order to determine how these factors drive biogeochemical cycles in different Arctic
soils. This project will lead to an in‐depth understanding of the underlying microbial processes governing
biogeochemical cycles in an environment relevant to DOE's mission.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
49
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Enhancing the Performance of Plasma‐facing Materials through Solute‐stabilized Nanostructured
Tungsten Alloys
Dr. Jason R. Trelewicz, Assistant Professor
Materials Science and Engineering
SUNY Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
Plasma‐facing materials (PFMs) in future fusion devices will be exposed to demanding operating
conditions involving high heat fluxes, aggressive particle and neutron fluxes, and high stresses. Although
tungsten has emerged as a promising candidate, there are several outstanding issues yet to be resolved,
including high temperature stability, mechanical performance, and radiation tolerance. The aim of this
research is to address these limitations in tandem by precisely tailoring the volume fraction, chemistry,
and structural state of grain boundaries in tungsten. These novel materials, known as solute‐stabilized
nanostructured tungsten alloys, will be designed and screened through thermodynamic modeling
coupled with in situ electron microscopy experiments. Select alloys will then be scaled via powder
metallurgy processes to synthesize bulk materials for mapping structure‐property‐performance
correlations. The insights established through this research will markedly enhance the state of tungsten
alloys for fusion applications and, in turn, provide opportunities to validate their performance under
relevant PFM conditions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
50
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Nonequilibrium Phenomena in Plasmas in Contact with Liquids
Dr. Juan P. Trelles, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Massachusetts Lowell
Lowell, MA 01854
Plasmas in contact with liquids are found in diverse applications, both established (e.g. electric
welding, metallurgy, confining walls of fusion reactors) and emerging (e.g. water treatment,
nanoparticle synthesis, biomaterials and medicine). The advancement of these applications and,
potentially, of unforeseen ones requires cohesive fundamental understanding of plasma‐on‐liquid
interactions. These interactions present two distinct but interdependent types of nonequilibrium
phenomena: (1) kinetic (microscopic, across the interface), involving complex multiphase physical and
chemical kinetics; and (2) dissipative (macroscopic, along the interface), comprising superficial transport
that is often conducive to instabilities and to the emergence of collective effects such as the
spontaneous formation of spot patterns. Kinetic nonequilibrium is responsible for some of the
remarkable characteristics of plasma processes such as high selectivity and energy efficiency. In
contrast, dissipative nonequilibrium is often detrimental, limiting process uniformity and throughput.
The project will establish a computational modeling and simulation method for the study of plasmas in
contact with liquid electrodes. The method is based on a Heterogeneous Variational Multiscale
approach that uses macroscale and microscale models consistently and complementarily: The
macroscale model provides the backbone for the description of distributed fields, while the microscale
model describes detailed kinetics locally. The approach is designed to achieve the high model fidelity
and high numerical accuracy required to concurrently capture kinetic and dissipative nonequilibrium in
application‐relevant configurations. The method will be used to determine the parameters controlling
stability and the emergence of collective behavior at the plasma‐liquid interface and to characterize the
role and interrelationship of these parameters with the rate of plasma‐driven electrolysis.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
51
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Unveiling the electroweak symmetry breaking mechanism at ATLAS and at future experiments with
novel silicon detectors
Dr. Alessandro Tricoli, Assistant Physicist
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
Upton, NY 11973
The discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland has confirmed the mechanism for the origin of
masses in the Standard Model (SM), providing key insights into electroweak symmetry breaking but, at
the same time, posing several new questions. Despite direct searches, no compelling evidence for new
physics signals at the LHC has yet been observed. Precision measurements of fundamental predictions of
the SM are an effective way to identify signatures that may lead to a paradigm change in particle
physics. This research program focuses on the analysis of data from the ATLAS experiment at the LHC to
comprehensively study interactions between the Higgs and W and Z bosons. Any discovery of deviations
from SM predictions in such vector boson fusion and scattering processes can signal new physics at very
high energies not directly accessible by the LHC. This method of probing physics beyond the SM can
become even more constraining through the high luminosity upgrade of ATLAS currently being carried
out for longer‐term operations at the LHC that are planned to begin in 2026. This project aims to
advance the upgrade of the ATLAS silicon detectors using novel, state‐of‐the art technology capable of
precision tracking and timing that will help distinguish primary collisions from background events.
These developments can have profound impact for the design and development of future
instrumentation for use in high radiation environments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
52
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Towards Precision Cluster Cosmology with LSST
Dr. Anja von der Linden, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
SUNY Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794
Only ~5% of the Universe is in a form of matter familiar to us ‐ planets, stars, gas, photons, and
neutrinos. The vast majority of the Universe is in the form of dark matter (~25%) and dark energy
(~70%). While dark matter is a form of matter that does not interact with us apart from gravity, dark
energy is even more mysterious ‐ it describes the puzzling fact that the expansion of the Universe is
accelerating rather than slowing down due to gravity. This is akin to throwing a ball up in the air and,
after it initially slows down, seeing it accelerate upwards. Solving the puzzle of dark energy requires
precision measurements of the expansion history and evolution of structure of the Universe. Clusters of
galaxies provide particularly powerful measurements of the Universe. The number of clusters as a
function of mass and evolution of this function with time are very sensitive to the details of the inner
workings of the Universe: if there is more dark matter, clusters grow faster; if there is more dark
energy, clusters grow slower; if our understanding of gravity is incorrect, clusters grow differently than
expected. The challenge for cluster cosmology lies in relating cluster observables (such as the number
of galaxies, the X‐ray luminosity, or the shadow cast on the Cosmic Microwave Background) to the
actual mass of the cluster. The most promising technique to determine the absolute mass calibration of
clusters is through weak gravitational lensing. The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) will
revolutionize our understanding of many aspects of the Universe, and, in particular, it will be the
definitive ground‐based weak‐lensing survey. The purpose of this project is to develop and test
techniques necessary to utilize LSST weak‐lensing capabilities for cluster cosmology and to apply these
techniques to targeted pre‐cursor and early LSST data. The results of this project will enable cluster
surveys to harness their tremendous statistical potential and to be a leading probe of cosmology in the
next decade.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
53
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Designing Metastability: Coercing Materials to Phase Boundaries
Dr. Thomas Z. Ward, Staff Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Transition metal oxides often possess metastable and non‐equilibrium states that can interact
across multiple length scales to give highly desirable emergent properties ranging from metal‐insulator
transitions to superconductivity to multiferroicity. Due to the strong coupling between the spin, charge,
orbital, and lattice parameters in these materials, even small changes to the underlying crystal lattice
can have dramatic impacts on behavior. Thus, effective control over lattice parameters not only
facilitates the understanding of multiple interactions in strongly correlated systems, but it can also be
used to create new phases and emergent behaviors. This project will apply low energy ion implantation
as a means of strain doping transition metal oxides to create, understand, and utilize previously
inaccessible structural distortions to obtain new and highly controllable functional properties. Central to
this effort is the ability to apply these distortions across vastly different length scales, which will allow
comparative studies on top‐down and bottom‐up approaches. This will give a deeper understanding of
how global structural changes influence local competing phase stabilities and will provide much‐needed
insight into the role of local distortions on emergent meso‐ and macroscopic phenomena. The specific
aims are to design new metastable ferroic states; to understand local inhomogeneity’s role in the
formation of emergent phases; and to understand the mechanisms of structural distortions under strain
doping. This work will deliver insights into the structure‐function relationship of transition metal oxides
while providing a means of designing multiple coexisting but dissimilar properties at the nanoscale in
single crystals.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
54
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Determining the Genetic and Environmental Factors Underlying Mutualism within a Plant‐Microbiome
System Driving Nutrient Acquisition and Exchange
Dr. David J. Weston, Staff Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
The importance of symbiosis is highlighted in plant‐microbe interactions where a microbe can
acquire nitrogen from the air (nitrogen fixation) and provide it to the plant in exchange for sugars
necessary for growth and metabolism. However, such beneficial interactions can shift to commensal
(neutral) or even antagonistic, depending on genetic and environmental factors that are poorly
understood. This project will provide a fundamental quantitative understanding on the role of plant host
and microbial genetics on maintaining beneficial symbiosis during environmental perturbations. With
that fundamental understanding, it will be possible to select host and microbes with the appropriate
genetic makeup to manipulate symbiotic relationships adapted to different environmental conditions.
The study systems will be a community composed of the moss Sphagnum and nitrogen‐fixing
cyanobacteria because of the genomic resources available for these organisms and their suitability for
advanced genomic and imaging technologies. This effort will identify the genes and metabolic functions
involved in nutrient exchange between the interacting plants and microbes and determine how
symbiotic systems respond to environmental perturbations in laboratory and field settings. Ultimately,
fundamental knowledge of the genetic and environmental factors driving plant and microbial nutrient
exchange will enhance our understanding of nutrient cycling in natural systems and provide the
foundation to improve bioenergy crop productivity in more complex biological communities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
55
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Enabling Beyond Forward Simulation for Predictive Multiscale Modeling
Dr. Timothy M. Wildey, Principal Member of Technical Staff
Sandia National Laboratories, New Mexico (SNL‐NM)
Albuquerque, NM 87185
This project is focused on the development of predictive modeling and simulation capabilities
for the science and national security missions of the Department of Energy. Many problems in materials
science, subsurface flow and mechanics, and magnetohydrodynamics are best described by multiphysics
and multiscale models. These problems are challenging to simulate because they incorporate detailed
physical interactions across a wide range of length and time scales. The proposed research will pursue
mathematically rigorous and computationally efficient approaches for making accurate predictions
about the properties and behavior of realistic, complex multiphysics applications. The proposed
advances in numerical discretization, uncertainty quantification, data assimilation, and model
adaptation will be integrated to enable greater predictive skill. In particular, these research
developments will support high‐consequence decision‐making capabilities that benefit a wide range of
DOE‐mission applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
56
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Genomes to ecosystem function: Targeting critical knowledge gaps in methanogenesis and translation
to updated global biogeochemical models
Dr. Kelly C. Wrighton, Assistant Professor
Department of Microbiology
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
Natural freshwater temperate wetland systems currently represent the largest natural source of
atmospheric methane but are relatively understudied using systems biology tools (e.g. meta‐omics)
compared to other high producing methane systems (e.g. peat, tropical, or reconstructed wetlands).
Using field investigations at the NOAA operated sentinel site on Lake Erie, methane producing activities
and responses to geochemical conditions will be determined along seasonal and spatial gradients
(Objective 1). Here, a combination of high‐throughput activity and gas measurements, combined with
high‐resolution systems biology and analytical methods, will provide in depth knowledge of the
microbiological, chemical, and physical constraints on methane production in wetlands. Using laboratory
microcosms, the formation of anoxic microsites and their capacity to facilitate methane production in
wetland soils will be simulated (Objective 2). This objective will validate the findings from the field
investigations, offering a more controlled environment for teasing out the role of different yet
interrelated variables. Lastly, these field and laboratory data will be used for multi‐scale, process‐level
evaluation of an ecosystem biogeochemical model that accommodates these newly identified processes
and parameterizes representation of these processes along relevant environmental gradients (Objective
3). This research will identify multiple interacting geochemical, ecological, and metabolic constraints
that are poorly understood, oversimplified, or missing in global biogeochemical methane models. This
proposal targets the role of oxygen limitation on methane processes in soil domains, to improve reactive
transport models of microbial carbon cycling across terrestrial‐aquatic soils and generate data on
nutrient cycling activities in Great Lake wetlands. This information could provide new insights into the
microbial controllers of Lake Erie eutrophication.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
57
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Optimization of Liquid Argon TPCs for Nucleon Decay and Neutrino Physics
Dr. Chao Zhang, Physics Associate III
Brookhaven National Laboratory
Upton, NY 11973
The question of why there’s a predominance of matter over antimatter in our universe is one of
the greatest unsolved mysteries of science. The US‐hosted international Deep Underground Neutrino
Experiment (DUNE), scheduled to start collecting data in the mid‐2020s, aims to explore this mystery
through the search for two rare but necessary conditions for the imbalance: evidence that some
processes produce an excess of matter over antimatter and a sizeable difference in the way matter and
antimatter behave. The DUNE experiment will look for signs of these conditions by studying proton
decays and neutrino oscillations using four massive 10‐kiloton detectors. The detectors, located 1.5 km
underground in caverns excavated at the Sanford Underground Research Facility in Lead, South Dakota,
will receive a high‐intensity neutrino beam generated at Fermilab in Illinois, 1,300 km away. This project
aims to optimize the performance of the Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPCs) that are at
the heart of these detectors to fully realize their potential to track and identify particles in three
dimensions, with a particular focus on sensitivity to proton decay. This research activity will establish a
hardware calibration system to aid in the robust extraction of signals from low‐noise cold electronics;
develop software for 3D reconstruction of complex events; analyze data from the prototype experiment
(ProtoDUNE) to verify the expected performance; and optimize the DUNE far detector design to
enhance its sensitivity to proton decay and neutrino physics. The research will strengthen our
understanding of the LArTPC technology and push the capabilities of LArTPC detectors beyond their
current design goals.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
58
Department of Energy Office of Science FY2017 Early Career Research Program
Abstracts, 59 Selectees for Negotiation of Financial Award, Last Updated August 9, 2017
Understanding and Controlling Aggregation Processes in Mixed‐Molecular Solids
Dr. Jeramy D. Zimmerman, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
This project will develop structure‐property relationships between molecular properties and
nanometer‐scale structure (i.e. morphology) of solid molecular mixtures and also between morphology
and macroscopic material properties. Solids formed from mixtures of different molecules are important
for a wide variety of applications including organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), high‐resolution
photoresists, charge‐carrier doping of organic electronics, and organic photovoltaics. In most cases,
these molecular mixtures are expected to perform best when mixed perfectly to the molecular level;
however, many blends exhibit significant phase segregation and clustering. Previously existing methods
to measure morphology of molecular blends have either resolution or chemical discrimination
capabilities insufficient to understand structure at nanometer length scales. Recently developed atom
probe tomography techniques for analyzing organic molecular materials have an unparalleled
combination of high‐resolution three‐dimensional imaging and sensitive molecular mass discrimination
capabilities to measure morphology at the nanometer scale. This research will compare the nanometer‐
scale morphology of molecular solids to molecular cohesive forces to understand why materials phase‐
segregate and to learn how to prevent segregation by creating thermodynamically stable solid solutions.
Morphologies of OLED materials will then be compared to their light emission properties to test and
validate hypotheses on morphology‐materials property relationships. The results will improve efficiency
of OLED lighting and displays, reducing energy consumption in homes and mobile devices; conclusions
will also be generalized for a broad impact to other molecular mixtures.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
59
