FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Establishing Defect-Property Relationships for 2D-Nanomaterials
Dr. Assel Aitkaliyeva, Assistant Professor
Nuclear Engineering Program
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32605
In recent years, studies of new families of two-dimensional nanomaterials (2DNMs) established that
they have unique properties that don’t conform to the behavior rules of their bulk counterparts.
Therefore, there are important questions that still need to be answered: how tolerant are 2DNMs to
extreme photon and particle fluxes and what are the mechanisms governing their radiation response? It
has been recently pointed out that graphene is not as representative of other 2DNMs as previously
believed. But why graphene’s response differs from other 2DNMs and what causes this behavior is not
clear. This project seeks to understand the physical processes occurring at multiple length scales in
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and determine the structural stability and property evolution in
TMDs in conditions far away from equilibrium. These goals will be accomplished through an experimental
effort investigating the similarities and differences between various types of 2DNMs and the fundamental
mechanisms governing their radiation response. In-situ and ex-situ ion and electron irradiation will be
used to directly control the structure and properties of TMDs. To complement the experimental work,
density functional theory calculations, analytic solutions to diffusion, and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
will be employed to elucidate the mechanisms of defect formation and evolution in these 2DNMs. The
long-term goals of the project are to 1) establish defect formation and evolution mechanisms in 2DNMs
subjected to irradiation, 2) quantify radiation tolerance of 2DNMs, and 3) develop the requisite
fundamental knowledge base needed to understand defect-property relationship in this unique class of
materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Genome-scale in vivo determination of Gibbs free energies (ΔG) in metabolic networks
Dr. Daniel Amador-Noguez, Assistant Professor
Department of Bacteriology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706
Recent breakthroughs in genome editing and metabolic engineering are expected to expand the
range of microorganisms and synthesis routes that may be used to produce biofuels and valuable
bioproducts from renewable biomass resources. Thus, there is an increasing need for new tools to
characterize the metabolic capabilities of nascent industrial organisms and improve the efficiency of their
production pathways. Thermodynamic analysis can help us understand how energy is transferred and
transformed within metabolic networks and has emerged as a powerful tool for pathway design and
metabolic engineering. This project will integrate thermodynamic analysis with advanced mass
spectrometry, computational modeling, and metabolic engineering to develop an approach for in
vivo determination of Gibbs free energies (ΔG) in metabolic networks. This project will also investigate
how the thermodynamics of biosynthetic pathways in microbial biofuel producers change dynamically as
substrates are depleted or products accumulate. This research will result in the construction of
computational models that quantitatively define trade-offs between energy efficiency of biosynthetic
pathways and their overall catalytic rates. The approach developed in this project will be useful for
identifying thermodynamic bottlenecks in native and synthetic pathways and pinpoint the enzymes whose
expression levels will have the largest effect on production rates and final product yields. It will be suitable
for high-throughput analysis of a wide range of organisms and aid the design of new and more efficient
metabolic routes for advanced biofuel production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Exploring the Lifetime Frontier with New Detectors and New Searches
Dr. Artur Apresyan, Associate Scientist
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, IL 60510
Reconstructing remnants of elementary particle interactions at high energy collider experiments
traditionally relies on measurements of particles’ energy and position using calorimeters and tracking
detectors. While performing such measurements, the one remaining component of the particle’s
coordinates, its time, has generally not been utilized to its full potential. This research program aims to
exploit this last dimension by developing novel detectors with precise timing and position information for
the High-Luminosity Large Hadron Collider (HL-LHC) upgrade of the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS)
detector at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland, and by performing
searches for new particles with long lifetimes using the data collected by CMS. Such an analysis will
provide a sensitive test of theories that predict particles with measureable flight paths. High-precision
timing detectors would effectively remove contamination from multiple concurrent proton-proton
interactions at the LHC, resulting in an increase in data usable for analysis, improved performance, and
corresponding cost savings. Additionally, these detectors will enable unique new capabilities in searches
for new phenomena, significantly enhancing the reach in searches for long-lived particles. The techniques
developed through this research will help advance particle detection and instrumentation beyond those
used at the HL-LHC, paving the way for 4-dimensional space and time track reconstruction in collider
experiments at future particle accelerators.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Understanding and Controlling the Fundamental Photochemistry of Protonic Solar Energy Conversion
Dr. Shane Ardo, Assistant Professor
Departments of Chemistry and of
Chemical Engineering and Materials Science
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
All major fuel-forming redox reactions are driven through changes in the concentrations of electrons,
holes, protons, and/or hydroxides. While traditional solar-energy conversion processes use light to
directly perturb the concentrations of electrons and/or holes, few works have used light to perturb the
concentration of only protons. This process is of particular interest because it is unique to photochemistry
in that it does not (yet) have a productive analog in solid-state physics. Therefore, the planned research
will interrogate the fundamental photochemistry of photoacid-dye-sensitized polymer membranes,
where solely light-driven proton release will be used to drive solar photochemical reactions. The planned
research will leverage photophysical and solid-state physics theories, techniques, and design strategies
previously developed for the study of traditional solar-energy conversion processes. The project will use
several photoacid dyes, commercial polymers, and polymer syntheses that are available from prior work.
Understanding the basic science of these membranes and their photochemical mechanisms is of use to
the DOE-relevant processes of solar photochemical fuel formation, solar photodialytic desalination, and
solar cells. These functional materials may have broad-reaching importance to many fields and may
provide the foundation for a completely new, inexpensive, and flexible energy technology that provides
added benefit to society.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Scalable Data-Efficient Learning for Scientific Domains
Dr. Prasanna Balaprakash, Computer Scientist
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Lemont, IL 60439
Extracting knowledge from scientific data—produced from observation, experiment, or
computation—presents a significant hurdle for scientific discovery. As the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) has moved toward data-driven scientific discovery, machine learning—in particular, deep
learning—has emerged as a critical driver for data-intensive scientific discovery. Deep learning methods
have been especially successful in dealing with regular data, such as images, where there is an underlying
Euclidean structure. In many DOE applications, however, data come from non-Euclidean domains such as
unstructured and irregular grids. Directly applying to the non-Euclidean domain deep learning methods
that had been developed for Euclidean data results in a loss of learning efficiency and poor prediction
accuracy. The overarching goal of this research is to develop scalable, non-Euclidean deep learning
approaches that can learn in complex DOE scientific domains with limited training data. We will conduct
research in four connected areas: (1) geometric deep learning; (2) data-efficient, few-shot learning that
integrates physical models and domain constraints; (3) neural architecture and hyperparameter searches;
and (4) scalability on DOE leadership-class systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Reaction Mechanism and Kinetics for Electrochemical Hydrogenation and Hydrogenolysis of Biomass-
Derived Species
Dr. Elizabeth J. Biddinger, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
The City College of New York
New York, NY 10031
Chemical conversion of biomass platform chemicals into more stable and desirable compounds at the
biorefinery is important for making these biomass-derived compounds viable for transport and use,
however, traditional chemical transformations require extensive infrastructure at large scales to be
economical. Small, on-site upgrading of products from biomass conversion, known as Biomass Upgrading
Depots (BUDs) have been proposed. By electrochemically converting biomass, modular units that do not
require significant infrastructure or the same scale as traditional chemical processing facilities, can be
utilized in these BUDs. Reduction and oxidation reactions can be performed electrochemically to obtain
valuable chemicals and intermediates on-site. When paired with excess renewable electricity (from sunny
or windy days), the process has promise to be economical and sustainable, all while addressing the energy
storage problem associated with renewable electricity generation. Electrochemical hydrogenation and
hydrogenolysis (ECH) are reduction reactions that can be used in these BUD systems. ECH offers additional
benefits over traditional chemical reactions because they can run at ambient conditions and do not
require externally-supplied hydrogen gas (which can be challenging to provide in large quantities at
remote locations where biorefineries are located). For ECH to become a viable method for chemical
upgrading at the biomass refinery, the underlying phenomena controlling ECH must be understood. The
research will investigate the ECH reactions involving furfural and 5-(hydroxymethyl)furfural (HMF), both
considered biomass platform chemicals, as reactants. Products of ECH from the reactions of both furfural
and HMF include fine chemical intermediates, polymerization agents, and biofuels. The reaction kinetics,
side reactions, and reaction mechanisms will be investigated. The experimental work will be completed
using electrochemical, chemical and spectroscopic techniques. The understanding gained through this
research will allow for better catalysts and reactors to be developed. Additionally, the findings will provide
valuable experimental results that could be fed back into future computational studies, further enhancing
the understanding of these systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Revealing Collective Spin Dynamics Under Device-Operating Conditions
to Enhance Tomorrow’s Electronics
Dr. Valentina Bisogni, Associate Physicist
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL)
Upton, NY 11973
The technological revolution of the past decades stemmed from the ability to control the motion of
charges in semiconductors and to manufacture semiconductor-based devices of ever-decreasing size for
information processing and storage. However, these gains are diminishing as semiconductor technology
is starting to reach physical limits for storage density and speed, for reasons mostly due to heat
dissipation. Collective spin excitations in quantum materials provide a revolutionary alternative for
devices with improved performances and energy efficiency as they permit the transfer of information
without requiring any movement of charge, thus eliminating the dominant source of energy dissipation.
Understanding how to manipulate these collective spin excitations would provide a foundation for the
next generation of energy-efficient electronics. This research will undertake the first study of the
microscopic spin dynamics in technologically-relevant quantum materials under device-operating
conditions. It will use soft X-ray Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering (RIXS) at the world-leading RIXS
spectrometer at the National Synchrotron Light Source II – the only instrument capable of providing the
required energy resolution for this study – and develop a unique sample environment, called Opera, to
realize device working conditions. The combined use of Opera and RIXS will provide an unprecedented
insight into the material properties and the behavior of the collective spin excitations when subject to
device-relevant perturbations of current, electric-field, magnetic-field, temperature gradient, and strain.
These results will be used to develop strategies towards optimizing the materials and their parameters in
order to improve the generation, propagation, and manipulation of collective spin excitations in quantum
materials in the form of spin waves, topological spin arrangements like skyrmions, or spin supercurrents.
This is a key-enabling step towards designing devices with enhanced spin-signal propagation performance
and spin-control possibilities, in response to the need for a new era of energy-efficient technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Uranyl Capture and Activation with Lewis Acids and Macrocyclic Hosts
Dr. James Blakemore, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Kansas
Lawrence, Kansas 66045
Nuclear power is attractive for meeting the current and future energy needs of society, in that it does
not release carbon dioxide or other pollutants into the atmosphere during routine use. However,
preparation of nuclear fuel, recovery of useful components from used fuel, and handling of waste
materials remain significant impediments to further deployment of important nuclear technologies. In
part, these problems arise from limited availability of chemical reactions that can reliably interconvert
forms of uranium and other heavy elements during preparation and processing. For example, harsh and
expensive chemicals are often required for making and breaking chemical bonds to uranium, and the
reactions involved are inefficient. The overall objective of this research is to harness knowledge of
chemical structure and bonding to develop a useful and predictive understanding of the fundamental
parameters that govern bond activation at the most common form of uranium, the unique uranyl ion
(UO 2+). Quantitative control of these parameters is to be pursued using assembly of molecular structures
2
containing multiple metal ions, a strategy inspired by metal-containing cofactors found in nature that
engage in bond making and breaking with high efficiency. Electron- and group-transfer reactions involving
uranium will be studied in this work, including detailed electrochemical studies of multimetallic species
dissolved in solutions as well as analogues immobilized on electrode surfaces. Outcomes from this
research are anticipated to include new knowledge of design rules for chemical reagents that could be
used for uranium processing, as well as a quantitative understanding of the interaction between uranium
and redox-inactive Lewis acidic ions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Microwave Single-Photon Sensors for Dark Matter Searches and Precision Neutrino Measurements
Dr. Daniel Bowring, Associate Scientist
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, IL 60510
The new and growing field of quantum information science (QIS) gives us tools and technologies that
enable cutting-edge particle physics research. This program will use superconducting, solid-state qubits
as low-noise photon counters to search for dark matter. The axion is a well-motivated dark matter
candidate particle, whose existence would also help solve the so-called "strong CP problem" and explain
the neutron's anomalous electric dipole moment. In the presence of a strong magnetic field, axions
convert into photons and these photons can be detected using equipment that is common in accelerator
and particle physics. However, the signal power from axion-to-photon conversion is expected to be less
than 1e-23 watts. At that level, even amplifiers operating at the quantum limit, such as DC SQUIDs, can
be too noisy for experimental requirements. We will apply quantum nondemolition measurement
techniques, adapted from QIS, to reduce detector error rates and improve axion signal sensitivity.
Quantum nondemolition may be thought of as an extreme case of state-squeezing, in which the phase of
a photon state is randomized at every measurement so that amplitude (i.e. photon number) can be
measured repeatedly and with high precision. This technique, enabled through qubits provided to us by
partners at the University of Chicago, has the potential to enhance axion search speeds by four orders of
magnitude while enabling sensitivity to weak axion-photon coupling models. The goal of this research
program is to adapt quantum nondemolition measurement techniques for use in an axion search. It would
form the basis for a next-generation axion experiment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Enabling Predictive Metabolic Modeling of Diurnal Growth Using a Multi-Scale Multi-Paradigm
Approach
Dr. Nanette Boyle, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
Although photosynthetic microorganisms such as algae and cyanobacteria have great potential as
renewable sources of energy and valuable chemicals, a lack of genetic engineering tools has prevented
their use as biofactories. Furthermore, most research on these organisms is conducted with cells grown
in constant light, which does not replicate the conditions of outdoor ponds with natural day/night cycles.
By integrating a variety of mathematical modeling techniques and experimental data, this research will
develop an advanced predictive model of growth and productivity in photosynthetic organisms, capturing
the changes in metabolism during day/night cycles, interactions between cells, and the availability of
nutrients and light in the environment. The project will focus on the emerging model green algae
Chromochloris zofingiensis, which accumulates large amounts of lipids that can be used to synthesize
biodiesel and other high-value added products. The performance of the model will be tested using data
collected from large-scale outdoor algal growth studies. The model generated in this project will not only
allow more predictive computer simulations of algal physiology, but it will also enable advanced and safe
engineering of photosynthetic microorganisms for optimal growth in outdoor ponds. The model will be
easily adaptable for other organisms as well as more complex microbial consortia, supporting BER’s
mission in energy and the environment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Multi-Hadron Systems via Lattice Quantum Chromodynamics
Dr. Raul Briceno, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Old Dominion University
Norfolk, VA 23529
The vast majority of the states of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) are composed of more than one
hadron. These manifest themselves as very short lived resonances or as stable bound states (light
nuclei). The goal of this research is to use lattice QCD to develop and implement a universal framework
for studying these systems directly from QCD. This framework will open up new classes of physical
observables, presently out of reach of theoretical studies but crucial to guiding, confirming, and
complementing experimental efforts to understand the QCD spectrum at the Jefferson National
Accelerator Laboratory and beyond. Two major milestones are expected to be reached by this
research. The first includes developing and implementing techniques for a first study of three-hadron
states, allowing for the determination of three-nucleon forces and QCD excitations that couple to multi-
hadron states as in the so-called Roper resonance. The second milestone entails studies of the structural
composition of resonant and non-resonant few-hadron systems. Combined, these two goals will give
access to unexplored sectors of QCD states and allow for construction of an image of their intrinsic
character.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Building a comprehensive understanding of ice nuclei sources from the ground up: Establishing the
impact of sea spray and agricultural soils
Dr. Susannah Burrows, Scientist
Atmospheric Sciences and Global Change Division
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)
Richland, WA 99352
Prediction of ice crystal concentrations in clouds is an outstanding problem in atmospheric sciences.
Among the obstacles to achieving this predictive understanding is the challenge of predicting atmospheric
ice-nucleating particles (INPs) across a range of atmospheric conditions. INPs play a critical role in initiating
freezing in clouds, impacting cloud radiative properties, and the location and timing of precipitation.
Despite their importance, our understanding of the emission, removal, and atmospheric transformation
processes controlling the atmospheric abundance of INPs is still in its infancy. Immersion-freezing INPs
active at warmer temperatures (> ca. −25°C) are especially critical to mixed-phase clouds, i.e., those that
contain both liquid droplets and ice crystals. Their abundance is often controlled by biogenic particles
(e.g., organic matter in soils and sea spray), which are challenging to distinguish observationally and to
represent in models. This project will transform predictive understanding of the sources of ice-nucleating
particles to the atmosphere by advancing understanding of how two less-studied but important particle
types contribute to determining real-world INP concentrations, and tackling the grand challenge of
predicting INP concentration from the observed characteristics and sources of atmospheric particles. This
project will use unique field campaign data from the Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) user
facility and measurement capabilities from DOE’s Environmental and Molecular Sciences Laboratory
(EMSL) to take on the grand challenge of predicting INP abundance, with a focus on two less well studied
classes of immersion-freezing nuclei active at T > −25°C—sea spray and agricultural soils. The improved
process-level understanding developed in this project can ultimately be incorporated into atmospheric
models, increasing their process realism and their utility as a tool for understanding complex surface-
atmosphere-cloud interactions in the Earth System.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Local Site Magnetic Susceptibility for Quantum Materials by Polarized Neutron Diffraction
Dr. Huibo Cao, Staff Scientist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Discovery and development of new quantum materials will be key to drive future computation,
information storage, sensor devices, and other energy relevant technologies. Understanding the
interactions leading to magnetic quantum phenomena in a wide range of quantum materials is extremely
important for developing such materials. Quantifying these interactions in materials that potentially
exhibit exotic states such as quantum spin liquids, topological insulators, and Weyl semimetals, are
currently being limited by a range of challenges. These include the lack of sizable high-quality crystals for
inelastic neutron scattering, limited high pressure capabilities, and the ability to disentangle the intrinsic
quantum phenomena versus effects from defects and site-disorder. To overcome these challenges,
magnetic interaction characterization on a small crystal is highly desirable. This project will develop Local
Site Magnetic Susceptibility methods based on polarized neutron diffraction, both under ambient and
high pressure conditions, to understand the balance of subtle magnetic interactions in quantum materials
that lead to the key quantum states. The methods use high resolution spin densities reconstructed from
polarized neutron diffraction data to visualize spin/orbital distributions and magnetic interactions, and
use deduced site magnetic susceptibility tensors to extract magnetic anisotropy and interactions through
spin Hamiltonian modeling and density functional theory calculations. The project will provide the
opportunity to investigate structures, magnetic states, magnetic interactions, and other bulk properties
on the same crystal and enable high pressure and field tuning of quantum states of a material. The project
will complement the bigger ORNL plan of studying and predicting quantum materials using the premier
high-performance computing facilities available at the lab. The proposal will take advantage of ORNL’s
strong neutron scattering user facilities and build off the expertise in the Basic Energy Sciences (BES)
Materials Sciences and Engineering program.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Probing Attosecond Bound Electron Dynamics Driven by Strong-Field Light Transients
Michael Chini, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32826
The measurement and control of ultrafast dynamics in electronically-excited states of molecular
systems have opened new frontiers in the study of internal energy conversion, charge transfer, and
coupling of electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom. Recently, such control has been extended to the
attosecond (1 attosecond = 10-18 seconds) regime, owing to the development of carrier-envelope phase-
stabilized few-cycle lasers and isolated attosecond extreme ultraviolet (XUV) pulses. This project applies
innovative laser techniques to reconstruct the time-dependent quantum mechanical wave packets
initiated by strong-field excitation in bound electronic states of gas-phase atoms and molecules, and to
control their dynamic evolution on attosecond to few-femtosecond (1 femtosecond = 10-15 seconds)
timescales. These dynamics have largely been hidden from previous experiments due to the lack of
suitable spectroscopic techniques to probe attosecond electronic motion in bound electronic and
vibrational states. Time-dependent electronic and vibrational wave packets initiated by intense, single-
cycle laser field transients will be reconstructed through all-optical measurements of the coherent XUV
polarization emission, allowing time-domain characterization of the build-up and decay of wave packet
coherence under different excitation conditions. The research will provide new perspectives on strong-
field coherent control of intramolecular energy transfer and chemical reactions, and will enable new tests
of theoretical models of strong-field interactions in multi-electron atoms and complex molecular systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Discovering the Mechanisms and Properties of
Electrochemical Reactions at Solid/Liquid Interfaces
Dr. Ethan J. Crumlin, Staff Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
Interfaces between solids, liquids, and gases play a pivotal role in how energy is stored, transferred,
and converted. Such electrochemical processes include the conversion of chemical energy to electrical
energy in a fuel cell, the storage of electrical energy in a battery, and the conversion of gases such as
carbon dioxide into useful chemical fuels using an electrolyzer. To improve these electrochemical
reactions, more selective, stable, and efficient interfaces are needed, which requires a better
understanding of complex molecular interactions at solid/liquid electrochemical interfaces under realistic
conditions. This research will clarify these interactions by synergistically combining experimental
techniques, advanced modeling, and computation. Specifically, the approach will leverage a suite of
advanced spectroscopy and microscopy techniques at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory’s Advanced
Light Source, including ambient-pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (APXPS). APXPS can probe,
under operating conditions, the reaction environment and products at electrified interfaces, providing
comprehensive and fundamental insight into the interactions between electrodes and electrolytes. The
knowledge gained through this work will enable future electrochemically based innovations and will
extend across scientific fields, including environmental, geological, chemical, materials, and biological
sciences.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Parallel-in-Layer Methods for Extreme-Scale Machine Learning
Dr. Eric C. Cyr, Principal Member of Technical Staff
Sandia National Laboratories (SNL-NM)
Albuquerque, NM 87185
The goal of this project is to transform how domain experts integrate experimental data and
simulation by using machine learning and deep neural networks (DNN). Commercial applications such as
image classification have been revolutionized by the use of DNNs. The proposed research aims to speed
the adoption of DNNs in DOE science and security mission spaces. One research thrust focuses on
developing a key “parallel-in-layers” technology for the scalable training of DNNs on high-performance
computing architectures. Another research thrust aims to broaden the range and predictive capability of
DNNs. The third research thrust focuses on applications to the prediction of sea ice thickness, inversion in
plasma modeling, and other DOE mission-relevant challenges. This scientific machine learning technology
will integrate DOE software frameworks (e.g., Trilinos, HYPRE, PETSc) with cutting-edge machine learning
tools under development such as TensorFlow and Caffe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Gluon Saturation Search in the Deep Small Bjorken-x Region using the Large Hadron Collider Beauty
Experiment (LHCb)
Dr. Cesar da Silva, Staff Scientist
Physics Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
Los Alamos, NM 87544
High-energy collisions, such as the ones produced at Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) in
Brookhaven/NY and at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN/Switzerland, can produce matter with
high gluon densities. Gluons are the particle mediators responsible for the strong nuclear interactions. At
high density gluons can start to fuse and form condensates, similar to cold atom experiments where
discoveries have been awarded four Nobel prizes in the last 20 years. These condensates show particles
with interesting collective behavior. This research aims for the unambiguous observation of gluon
condensates in collisions produced at the LHC using the LHC Beauty experiment (LHCb), which has a
unique detector coverage to observe saturated gluons. This study will include development of improved
techniques to select events with isolated photons, improve tracking of particles and analysis directed at
demonstrating the existence of the predicted gluon condensate. The results of this work will have
implications in the current understanding of particle production in proton and nucleus collisions and the
quantum behavior of the strong forces.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Structure of the Cyanobacterial NAD(P)H Dehydrogenase Complex (NDH-1) and Its Role in Cyclic
Electron Flow and Carbon Dioxide Hydration
Dr. Karen Davies, Staff Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
Photosynthesis is a vital source of energy for nearly all living organisms on earth. Using energy from
the sun, plants, most algae, and cyanobacteria combine water and carbon dioxide (CO ) to make sugar.
2
The process of photosynthesis is divided into two steps: the light reactions and the dark reactions. The
light reactions use the sun’s energy to split water and generate the cellular energy molecules adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). The dark reactions use
both of these energy molecules to produce sugar from CO . The ratio of ATP:NADPH produced and
2
consumed by photosynthesis needs to be precisely controlled. This is achieved in the light reactions via
two pathways: the first, called linear electron flow, produces ATP and NADPH at a ratio of 1:2.5, the
second, called cyclic electron-flow, produces only ATP. Although the first pathway is well studied, very
little is known about the molecular mechanism of the cyclic pathway. The research will close this
knowledge gap by performing a series of structural and functional experiments on a protein complex
called NADPH dehydrogenase. NADPH dehydrogenase is thought to be a key component of cyclic electron
flow and is the last of the large photosynthetic protein complexes to be understood at a mechanistic level.
Once the process of cyclic electron flow is understood, better manipulatation of the light reactions of
photosynthesis to generate the correct ratio of cellular energy, required for bio-engineering applications,
will be possible, thereby improving the yield of bio-products.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Exploring New Diamond Surfaces with Precision Chemistry and Quantum Spectroscopy
Dr. Nathalie de Leon, Assistant Professor
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
Diamond is a superlative material, and has been explored as a potential material platform for a wide
range of future technologies, including high power electronics, electrochemical cells in harsh conditions,
implantable biomedical devices, quantum sensors, and quantum networks. However, these applications
have been hindered by a lack of control over the diamond surface. Uncontrolled surfaces can lead to
electronic defects, magnetic noise, and changes in material properties that can affect even bulk devices.
New methods will be developed to understand and control the surface of diamond. This is a challenging
project because diamond is an inert material, making it difficult to alter chemically, and also because it is
the hardest material, making it difficult to polish and process. To address these challenges, the research
will use high precision chemistry, surface spectroscopy, and quantum spectroscopy techniques in a home
built instrument operated under ultrahigh vacuum in order to study the reactivity of the diamond surface
and to prepare novel surfaces that are inaccessible by conventional methods. In addition, new forms of
solution-based chemistry at diamond surfaces will be studied, leveraging the novel surfaces created with
ultrahigh vacuum surface chemistry. This foundational study will enable the development of diamond as
a platform for a large number of classical and quantum applications, and will also contribute to the
fundamental understanding of surface reactivity and surface spectroscopy.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Project 8 at Penn State: Developing the Ultimate Neutrino Mass Experiment
Dr. Luiz De Viveiros Souza Filho, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
The neutrino mass is one of the most important unknown quantities in physics. The most sensitive
direct searches for the neutrino mass rely on the beta decay method: nuclei undergoing beta decay emit
an electron and a neutrino. Thanks to energy conservation, one can determine the mass of the neutrino
from the shape of the electron spectrum near its endpoint, that is, the maximum energy of the emitted
electrons. The Project 8 experiment has developed a novel technique called Cyclotron Radiation Emission
Spectroscopy (CRES) to precisely measure the beta decay spectrum in tritium, and thus obtain a neutrino
mass measurement with sensitivity surpassing that of existing experiments. An electron trapped in a
uniform magnetic field will emit cyclotron radiation with frequency that depends on its kinetic energy, so
that a measurement of the radiation provides a nondestructive electron energy measurement. The
Project 8 collaboration has already demonstrated the viability of this technique using a small-scale
(~10 cm3) prototype. However, an attempt at measuring the neutrino mass will require a vast increase in
the number of tritium decays, which can be accomplished through an increase in detector volume to
10-100 m3. One crucial feature of such a detector is the ability to identify single electrons in a large cavity
instrumented with a multi-channel antenna array, which will present unique challenges for the acquisition
and reconstruction of signals. This project will develop the signal reconstruction techniques and
electronics needed to take CRES to the next level, such as the use of digital beam-forming for single
electron detection and tracking in large volumes. This research project will include the simulation of the
expected electron signal in software and hardware; building of test chambers instrumented with multiple
prototype antennas and electronics; development of signal reconstruction algorithms; and the
construction and operation of the Project 8 detector, with a focus on signal acquisition, electronics, and
data analysis. The successful completion of this project will extend the functionality of the CRES technique
to large scales, providing essential tools and support that will allow Project 8 to move into the next phases
of its experimental program, and lead to the ultimate neutrino mass experiment.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Controlling Interfacial Charge Separation Energetics and Kinetics
Dr. Jared Delcamp, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of Mississippi
University, MS 38677
Charge separation at interfaces is critical to many energy related technologies including solar
powered photovoltaics and photoelectrochemical cells. A better understanding of how to control the
potential energy of charge separation and the duration of photoinduced charge separations at interfaces
is needed for solar-to-electric and solar-to-fuel systems. The lack of a set of design principles for
photoactive components in large potential energy charge separation systems is currently limiting the
development of many solar-to-electric and solar-to-fuel systems. Basic understanding of large potential
energy photoinduced charge separations across interfaces is needed for the full potential energy use of
the highest energy photons provided by sunlight. This project seeks to address the fundamental
knowledge required to enable solar-to-electric and solar-to-fuel systems access to efficient use of sunlight.
Research will focus on synthesizing tailored molecules specifically to generate large potential energy
charge separations at organic-inorganic material interfaces. Rational molecular design principles will be
put forward through this research that could enable the rapid design of next generation solar conversion
systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Understanding Impurity Transport in Magnetically Confined Fusion using Interpretive Modeling and
High-Sensitivity Material Characterization Techniques
Dr. David Donovan, Assistant Professor
Department of Nuclear Engineering
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
Control of the plasma-material interface represents a significant challenge to sustained operation of
a fusion device, both in terms of how the plasma facing components (PFCs) will withstand the intense
particle and heat fluxes generated by the fusion plasma and how the plasma responds to the influx of
impurities produced by the gradual degradation of the PFCs. The presence of impurities in the plasma can
result in prohibitively high radiative power losses that drain heat from the plasma that is needed to
maintain the high temperatures required for fusion. These losses become increasingly more severe for
higher mass (high atomic number, or high-Z) elements. Many of the leading candidates for PFCs are high-
Z materials such as tungsten and molybdenum due in part to their relatively high melting temperature
and low erosion rate. The purpose of this research is to confront the challenge of controlling
contamination of the core plasma (highest temperature region) by high-Z impurities. This will be
accomplished through global impurity transport studies and a directed focus on the transport of high-Z
impurities in the plasma edge (near the PFCs) and the ability of the edge plasma to screen impurities from
the core plasma. This work will contribute to upcoming research campaigns on several fusion experiments
focused on the effects of high-Z PFCs. Experiments will be designed to determine the operating conditions
that can best benchmark global impurity transport models, and ex-situ analysis of PFCs will be performed
after the research campaigns to integrate the diagnostic data into advanced interpretive models. The
advanced modeling and characterization tools will be used to determine how properties of impurity
transport are affected, and may be actively modified, by the plasma operating configuration. This research
will make an invaluable contribution to the fusion community’s effort to address the challenge of impurity
driven radiative power losses in fusion devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Chemical Organization, Structure and Dynamics at Complex Liquid-Liquid Interfaces: Mechanistic
Insight into Selective Solvent Extraction and Self-Assembly
Dr. Benjamin Doughty, Research Staff
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
Oak Ridge, TN 37831
A major challenge in separating a mixture of molecules or ions from one another is understanding
and controlling the chemical processes that occur at a liquid-liquid interface, such as oil and water. The
interface between two liquid phases is a hotspot for molecular self-assembly and anomalous chemical
processes that ultimately dictate how species can move from one phase to another. Despite the
widespread use of liquid-liquid extraction methods, the chemical events governing selectivity and
efficiency are not well understood, which limits the ability to rationally design new separations schemes
to meet the demands of the next generation of clean energy technology. A key barrier to obtaining this
insight is the current inability to directly probe the structure and dynamics of the molecularly thin
interface using conventional spectroscopic methods while not being overwhelmed by the signals
originating from the bulk phases. Thus, to understand the events at the interface, one must develop an
approach that is uniquely capable of providing chemical insight into the interfacial chemical composition,
organization, and dynamics. The overarching goal of this work is to develop a unified understanding of
the molecular structure and dynamics governing the mechanisms of chemical separations at liquid-liquid
interfaces using surface-specific spectroscopies, such as vibrational and electronic sum frequency
generation, in conjunction with neutron scattering methods to advance the design of selective and
efficient chemical separations. To address this goal, the proposed work will pursue three specific aims to
address the following thematic questions: (1) What are the differences in local chemical environment and
molecular ordering that mediate selectivity at liquid-liquid interfaces? (2) How does curvature at liquid-
liquid interfaces impact self-assembly and selectivity? and (3) How are ultrafast molecular dynamics of
interfacial recognition complexes manifested in chemical selectivity? This novel approach using a tailored
set of complimentary nonlinear spectroscopic measurement techniques developed at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory is poised to address these long-standing questions underlying selective and efficient chemical
separations for the first time by probing different aspects of the same chemical phenomena on
characteristic time and length scales. The new insight gained from this work will accelerate the design of
selective and efficient next generation separation schemes by providing missing mechanistic insight into
the phenomena taking place at the liquid-liquid interface during extraction. Through understanding the
mechanisms by which extractions operate, new more efficient and selective separations targeting
complex, or undesirable supply streams, such as nuclear waste and rare-earth waste streams, can be
developed. This underpins the DOE Grand Challenge Science questions in understanding and controlling
matter at the molecular level to ultimately produce efficient energy technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Improving Neutrino Detection in DUNE with Pixel Sensors
Dr. Daniel A. Dwyer, Staff Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
Do neutrinos and antineutrinos behave identically? Is the mass of the third neutrino state much heavier
or much lighter than the other two states? The Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) intends
to answer these questions by looking for subtle differences in neutrino versus antineutrino propagation
over ~1300 km to large cryogenic liquid argon time-projection chamber (LArTPC) detectors. The capability
of this experiment will depend significantly on precise knowledge of the neutrino beams produced by the
particle accelerator at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory. Characterization using another LArTPC
located near the origin of the neutrino beam has distinct advantages, but is hindered by an intense
neutrino flux. The intensity will result in multiple simultaneous neutrino interactions, which would be
difficult to disentangle when using standard projective readout techniques. I aim to establish the
techniques for operation of a LArTPC detector in a high-rate environment, including the development of
a true three-dimensional (3D) micro-power charge readout system and related feature recognition
algorithms. Not only will these developments enhance the expected sensitivity the DUNE measurement
of neutrino oscillation, but should also enable high-statistics searches for new phenomena in intense
neutrino beams. These techniques have additional potential for use in the DUNE far detector, where they
would enhance discrimination of signal from background, as well as in future dark matter searches and
nuclear security applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
New perspectives on QFT and gravity from quantum entanglement
Dr. Thomas Faulkner, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801
The objective of this research is to study fundamental aspects of quantum field theory (QFT) and the
nature of space-time and gravity via the patterns of quantum entanglement present in these theories.
These patterns will be harnessed to find new constraints on the dynamics of QFT and quantum gravity.
These topics find a natural home within the holographic duality, a deep mathematical correspondence
discovered in string theory where a gravitational system can be described by a quantum system without
gravity. By studying the spatial distribution of quantum correlation in various quantum systems one goal
is to directly observe the holographic emergence of quantum gravity within this setting and to characterize
the space-time structure that emerges along with it. In achieving these aims this research will shed light
on the thermodynamic nature of gravity and explore the implications of this paradigm for our
understanding of the unification of gravity with quantum mechanics. Additionally, this project aims to
develop new tools for studying the structure of quantum entanglement in QFT and in so doing, use
powerful constraints satisfied by entanglement and its generalizations to place bounds on the basic data
of the QFT. In turn these bounds will be related to causality constraints and quantum energy conditions,
which are local and non-local bounds on the energy density for arbitrary out of equilibrium states of the
QFT.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Integrated Predictive Modeling of ELM Suppression and Mitigation
Dr. Nathaniel M. Ferraro, Research Scientist
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL)
Princeton, NJ 08543
A magnetic fusion reactor must successfully maintain plasma at 100 million degrees Celsius, while
simultaneously limiting the temperature of plasma-facing components of the reactor to a small fraction
of that. In tokamaks, instabilities known as Edge Localized Modes (ELMs) intermittently eject significant
energy from the plasma edge, potentially melting or eroding plasma-facing components in reactor-scale
tokamaks. It has been found that applying 3D magnetic perturbations—often called “Resonant Magnetic
Perturbations” (RMPs)—can successfully mitigate or suppress ELMs under some conditions. However,
the physical process underlying RMP ELM suppression is not well understood, and we do not have a
model that can successfully predict the conditions required for suppression. Recent experimental results
suggest that RMPs create localized thermal and particle transport that suppress thermal gradients below
the ELM stability threshold, but modeling this process has been challenging due to the complex interplay
between the 3D magnetic field geometry generated by the RMPs and the heat and particle transport
properties of that magnetic field configuration. We propose to address this challenge by integrating our
best models of 3D plasma magnetic equilibrium with models of transport in 3D fields. In doing so, we
will quantify the expected changes to the transport properties of a tokamak plasma that occur when
RMPs are applied. By applying this integrated model to a database of discharges from various tokamaks
in which RMPs were applied, we will determine which transport mechanisms are dominant, and which
correlate with the observation of ELM suppression. Ultimately we hope to provide both an improved
understanding of the physics of RMP ELM suppression and a validated, predictive model that can be
used to design and optimize future tokamaks with confidence.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Weak Interactions in Nuclei and Nuclear Matter
Dr. Stefano Gandolfi, Staff Scientist
Theoretical Division
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
Los Alamos, NM 87545
The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the structure and
electroweak processes in nuclei and nucleonic matter that are critical to present and future experiments
at rare isotope facilities, high-energy accelerators, and to astrophysical observations. Neutrino
interactions with nuclei and dense matter, in particular the theory support to future double beta-decay
experiments, have been identified as one of the most important scientific questions in nuclear physics in
the most recent Nuclear Science Advisory Committee long-range plan. These properties are critical to an
understanding of finite nuclei, how they interact with high-energy electrons and neutrinos produced at
accelerators, and also to astrophysical environments like neutron stars and supernovae. In order to solve
for these problems, sophisticated computational techniques are required. In this project we use numerical
methods based on Monte Carlo integrations. These methods can efficiently exploit the largest available
supercomputers, and our codes are developed to efficiently use the largest available high-performance
machines. The main input for these calculations are i) the interactions describing how nucleons interact
within nuclei, and ii) the interactions of nucleons with external probes like electrons and neutrinos. We
use numerical methods to calculate nuclear properties with the goal of validating our models for i) and ii)
by comparing our calculations with available precise data on beta decays and electron scattering in nuclei,
and then make predictions for neutrino scattering, neutrino propagation in neutron stars and supernovae,
and relevant matrix elements for double beta-decay experiments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Time-Resolved Imaging of Non-Equilibrium Electron Dynamics with Novel X-ray Holographic
Approaches
Dr. Tais Gorkhover, Panofsky Fellow
Stanford PULSE Institute
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
The ability to follow transient structural changes is essential for understanding and controlling non-
equilibrium phenomena such as catalytic reactions, ultrafast phase transitions, and energy transfer from
light to matter. These processes often evolve from a complex interplay between rapid electronic and
nuclear motions at the nanoscale, which are hardly accessible with conventional microscopic methods.
State-of-the-art imaging tools often require long exposure times to achieve high spatial resolution and
thus, their sensitivity to short-lived phenomena is limited. Ultrafast spectroscopic methods can provide
valuable information about transient states, but the signal ambiguity often increases with the complexity
and heterogeneity of the sample. The capabilities offered by current and next-generation X-ray laser
facilities, such as the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) and its successor, LCLS II, offer the potential to
directly visualize ultrafast dynamics with high spatial and temporal resolutions. This research program will
develop and apply novel ultrafast X-ray diffraction imaging approaches that exploit these cutting-edge X-
ray sources to advance the fundamental understanding of non-equilibrium processes in complex
nanoscale systems.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Dynamic Multinuclear Active Sites Formed from Mobilized Single Atoms on Heterogeneous Supports
for Selective Oxidation Catalysis
Dr. Rajamani Gounder
Larry and Virginia Faith Assistant Professor
Charles D. Davidson School of Chemical Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
The nation’s energy future has been changed irrevocably by the advent of domestic shale gas
resources, which are cheap and abundant enough to meet energy demands for the next one hundred
years. Shale resources are distributed across a vast geographical footprint and often in remote locations,
which incurs high transportation costs for collection at centralized chemical plants, refineries, or export
terminals. The largest component of shale gas is methane, familiar as the main hydrocarbon in natural
gas. Methane can be converted into energy through combustion to form water and carbon dioxide.
Converting methane to methanol, however, would form a liquid compound that can be transported more
easily and subsequently converted into a variety of chemicals and fuels. The challenging task of oxidizing
methane selectively to form methanol may be made possible with a catalyst: a material that contains
active sites, which are geometric arrangements of specific atoms that are proficient at changing the
chemical identity of reacting molecules by trading electrons and rearranging their chemical bonds. This
research will address methane conversion by applying a new concept in catalyst design: dynamic
multinuclear active site formation, which describes how single metal atoms located within carefully
chosen porous structures and in the presence of a solvating environment can form ionic metal complexes.
These metal complexes become mobilized and can interact with other metal complexes in a reversible
manner to form multinuclear active sites. The objective of this research is to understand the structure and
function of dynamic multinuclear active sites in order to design catalysts that react with molecular oxygen
(O ) to oxidize hydrocarbons. The knowledge gained from this research has the potential to develop new
2
technologies for continuous methane oxidation to methanol, and to diversify the strategies available to
use the nation’s abundant hydrocarbon resources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Emergent Phenomena at Mott Interfaces – a Time- and Depth-Resolved Approach
Dr. Alexander Gray, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19130
Rational design and efficient ultrafast control of new electronic and magnetic phases of matter at
oxide interfaces is considered to be one of the most promising avenues toward realizing new generations
of energy-efficient devices. The key requirement for the realization of such groundbreaking technology is
a clear understanding of how new phases of matter arise and evolve far from equilibrium in both time-
and space domains. In order to gain such understanding, this program will use intense THz electric-field
pulses generated by a femtosecond laser to directly modify the electronic structure and magnetic states
at the atomically-abrupt interfaces between ultrathin oxide layers (calcium manganite and lanthanum
nickelate). The objective is to disentangle, understand, and harness control over the intricate competing
interactions responsible for tunable emergent magnetism at the layer interface. In order to effectively
investigate such interfacial phenomena both statically and in the time domain, this program will marry
the x-ray standing-wave method with the ultrafast polarization-dependent x-ray scattering and imaging
techniques enabled by the most recent technological advances at the DOE's x-ray free-electron laser
(XFEL) and synchrotron facilities. This will result in the development of a powerful new experimental
platform that can be used to study electronic and magnetic systems driven out of equilibrium with time
and depth resolution. The new depth-resolved ultrafast x-ray scattering techniques and instrumentation
developed in the course of this program will be generalizable for immediate use at the DOE's synchrotron
and XFEL facilities.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Kinetic effects on self-organization in low-temperature magnetized plasmas
Dr. Kentaro Hara, Assistant Professor
Department of Aerospace Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77845
Self-organized patterns and structures occur in many systems, including a wide variety of space and
laboratory plasmas. Laboratory plasmas with crossed electric and magnetic fields, such as magnetron
discharges and Hall-effect thrusters, can exhibit well-arranged, coherent structures but the processes for
such structure formation in plasma are not well understood. The physics of partially-ionized, low-
temperature magnetized plasmas is complex because collisionless instabilities can affect collisional
phenomena, such as ionization and transport, and vice versa, and the presence of materials, such as
sheath and electron injection, can influence the properties of the plasma. The aim of this research is to
advance the fundamental understanding of low-temperature magnetized plasmas, particularly the
nonlinear coupling between small-scale kinetic phenomena and large-scale self-organizing structures.
Self-consistent particle-based kinetic models will be developed in canonical and realistic configurations
of a cross-field discharge. This project also involves development of massively-parallel numerical
algorithms using high performance computing capabilities for feasible multiscale simulations of low-
temperature magnetized plasmas. Understanding the interplay of small-scale kinetic phenomena and
large-scale self-organizing structures is crucial for improving the controllability of plasma flows and
reactions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Geophysical Signatures of Crack Network Coalescence in Rocks at Multiple Length Scales
Dr. Ahmedreza (Reza) Hedayat, Assistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
Subsurface discontinuities, ranging in scale from micro-cracks (micrometer) to fractures (millimeters
to meters) to faults (10s of meters to kilometers), control subsurface rock integrity and permeability.
Processes involving the organization of small cracks into larger fractures occur quickly and at multiple
spatial and temporal scales, creating immense challenges in understanding the underlying causes of crack
network coalescence and in predicting fracture network evolution over a range of subsurface stress
perturbations. The goal of this research is to identify key geophysical signatures of crack coalescence in
rocks under realistic stress conditions through a novel laboratory design allowing, for the first time,
concurrent recording of optical, acoustic emission, and ultrasound images. These data will provide new
insight needed to interpret stresses and fracture evolution from micro-seismic events in the subsurface.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Implications of Aerosol Physicochemical Properties Including Ice Nucleation at ARM Mega Sites for
Improved Understanding of Microphysical Atmospheric Cloud Processes
Dr. Naruki Hiranuma, Assistant Professor
Department of Life, Earth, and Environmental Sciences
West Texas A&M University
Canyon, TX 79016
A specific subset of atmospheric particles can act as ice-nucleating particles (INPs) in mixed-phase
clouds and, ultimately, influence precipitation and the Earth’s radiative energy balance. Despite the
importance of INPs, current ambient INP data derived from field measurements are not well interpreted
with detailed aerosol and cloud properties, except for a few short-term field studies. This project will fill
this gap by using long-term measurements from DOE’s Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) sites,
complemented with robust and well-characterized INP measurements that will be archived in the ARM
database. Detailed ARM observational data of aerosol chemical composition speciation, abundance,
cloud condensation nuclei activity, and hygroscopicity are of the utmost importance for better
understanding of INP mixing states, as well as their implication in cloud, precipitation, and regional
weather patterns. The proposed new INP measurements will experimentally characterize abundance and
physicochemical properties of ambient INPs at the ARM Southern Great Plains (SGP), Eastern North
Atlantic (ENA), and North Slope of Alaska (NSA) atmospheric observatories. A combination of a new in
situ expansion chamber and the offline droplet freezing assay technique for INP measurement, as well as
microspectroscopic characterization techniques, will be used to elucidate abundance and
physicochemical properties of ambient INPs at the above-mentioned ARM observational sites. Different
INP episodes (agricultural, marine biogenic, and Arctic at SGP, ENA, and NSA, respectively) will be assessed
and evaluated to help understand convective and mixed-phase cloud systems typically observed in these
regions. The proposed research will generate data to understand how particle chemical composition
and mixing state influence ambient ice nucleation propensity at the ARM sites. Such datasets have long
been a missing piece in the study of cloud microphysics and atmospheric chemistry, and are of importance
to improve atmospheric models of cloud feedback and to determine their impact on the global radiative
energy budget. Currently, ice formation processes are very poorly represented in weather and earth
system models, including DOE’s Energy Exascale Earth System Model (E3SM), and this study will support
the DOE mission by providing INP parameterizations representative of the ARM sites. To constrain E3SM,
this project will produce a variety of INP parameterizations, such as ice nucleation active surface site
density, cumulative number concentration of INPs per volume of air, and water activity-based freezing
descriptions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
O-Acetylation and methylation engineering of plant cell walls for enhanced biofuel production
Dr. Kolby Jardine, Research Scientist
Climate and Ecosystem Sciences Division
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
Polysaccharides are major components of plant cell walls that can be converted into fuels by
microbial fermentation, making plant biomass an important bioenergy resource. However, a substantial
fraction of plant cell wall polysaccharides is chemically modified with methyl and acetyl groups that reduce
yield of microbial fermentation. Although little is known about the biochemical and physiological
functions of those cell wall modifications, it has been shown that their volatile intermediates (methanol
and acetic acid) are tightly associated with plant growth, stress, and senescence processes but are not
captured by traditional metabolomics analysis, representing an important gap in our knowledge of cell
wall metabolism. This project will study the metabolism of those cell wall modifications and volatile
intermediates as well as their role in central physiological processes in the emerging biofuel tree species
California poplar (Populus trichocarpa) using field settings and controlled environmental conditions. The
main goal of this research is to modify the expression of key genes involved in cell wall metabolism in
order to reduce the amount of methyl and acetyl groups present on cell walls. These genetic modifications
will be evaluated for potential impacts on important plant hydraulic and physiological processes including
proper functioning of vascular tissues to support transpiration, leaf water potential and stomatal
regulation, net photosynthesis, and high temperature/drought stress responses. Understanding and
manipulating the metabolism of cell wall modifications will not only provide important knowledge on the
physiology and ecology of plants but will also allow the generation of engineered bioenergy crops such as
poplar for sustainable production of biofuels and bioproducts, addressing BER's goal of developing
renewable bioenergy resources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Development of Coherent Surface Scattering Imaging with Nanometer Resolution for Revealing 3D
Mesoscaled Structures
Dr. Zhang Jiang, Physicist
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Lemont, IL 60439
At sub-microscopic length scales, structurally heterogeneous planar surfaces and interfaces
provide many of the functional properties of technologically relevant advanced materials. The objective
of this project is to determine the exact near-surface structure of such materials by developing a three-
dimensional X-ray imaging technique that combines surface-sensitive grazing incidence X-ray
measurements with phase inversion techniques that rely on the coherence properties of X-rays. This new
capability will enable non-destructive imaging of sub-micron inhomogeneities and non-periodic structures
on and within opaque, planar materials allowing the exact structure to be correlated with device
performance. Application areas for this new method include layered or hetero-structured energy-related
devices, hierarchically structured meta-materials for photonics and defect analysis in nano-patterned
integrated circuits. This project will also deepen the understanding of X-ray scattering at surfaces using
coherent radiation and will advance the development of wave-propagation simulation methods and
software tools to further the application of reflective optics especially at coherent X-ray sources.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Single Molecule Fluorescence Imaging for a Background-Free Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay Search
Dr Benjamin Jones, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX 76019
The nature of the neutrino and its mass are fundamental unknowns in nuclear and particle physics,
with consequences for cosmological mysteries including the matter / antimatter asymmetry of the
Universe, and the existence of new physics at very high energy scales. The only known way to establish
experimentally that the neutrino is a Majorana particle (meaning that it is its own anti-particle) is through
observation of the ultra-rare and still unobserved process of neutrinoless double beta decay. All
experiments that have searched for this process to date have been plagued by backgrounds from ambient
radioactivity in detector materials. To meet the target sensitivity of next-generation searches, ultra-low
background techniques leading to contamination of less than 0.1 counts per ton per year in the signal
region of interest are required. No such technology has yet been demonstrated to achieve this goal. This
work involves R&D toward a novel method of achieving a background free search for neutrinoless double
beta decay in xenon-136: barium tagging using single molecule fluorescent imaging, coupled to high
pressure xenon gas time projection chambers. This mixes advances from biochemistry, microscopy,
nuclear and particle physics to yield a technology that may be paradigm shifting for the field, enabling a
new class of highly sensitive, background-free neutrinoless double beta decay searches.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Early Career - Exploring the Higgs Sector at the Energy Frontier with Bottom Quarks, Machine
Learning, and the Upgraded ATLAS Pixel Detector
Dr. Michael Kagan, Panofsky Fellow
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
The Higgs boson, recently discovered at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European
Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) located in Switzerland, remains among the least understood
particles in the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics that describes the fundamental constituents of
matter in the universe and their interactions. Deep mysteries of the Higgs boson still remain unanswered,
such as how its self-interaction shapes the Higgs potential energy that is central in the process of
Electroweak Symmetry Breaking (EWSB) or how new physics beyond the SM may alter its interactions.
This research program plans to use data from the ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) experiment at the
LHC to explore such questions through searches and measurements of key Higgs boson interactions. More
specifically, the analysis of high transverse momentum Higgs boson production, in order to study the high
energy behavior of Higgs interactions, and double Higgs boson production, to study the nature of the self-
interaction and its role in EWSB, will be pursued. Fundamental analysis challenges, including identifying
decays of the Higgs to bottom quarks and discriminating against extremely large backgrounds, will be
addressed by developing innovative analysis methods and bottom quark identification techniques. Many
of these advancements will be built upon modern machine learning computational techniques. To ensure
long-term efficacy, development of the inner barrel pixel system of the ATLAS Inner Tracker upgrade for
the future High-Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) era will be pursued. The tracking system will be vital for providing
high performance bottom quark identification at the HL-LHC, further enabling detailed studies that probe
the characteristics of the Higgs boson.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Quantum Control and Tuning of Magnetic Two-Dimensional van der Waals Heterostructures
Dr. Liqin Ke, Assistant Scientist
Ames Laboratory
Ames, IA 50011
Two-dimensional (2D) quantum materials offer potential novel applications in energy-efficient,
nanoscale information storage and computing. To accelerate the design and optimization for desirable
electronic and magnetic properties, this project will develop cutting-edge, highly-efficient computational
methods to predict and control such properties in these quantum materials. This project permits complex
designs to be quickly tested for timely guidance to experiment for validation, and, in turn, also provides
direct verification of the theoretical results. This project will focus on magnetic van der Waals layered
materials, which are ideal platforms for 2D magnetism. Beyond accelerating the discovery of novel
magnetic materials, this project will also advance the fundamental understanding of quantum effects in
nanostructures for the design of transformative technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Tetravalent Actinide Speciation: Template Directed Assembly, Speciation, and Reactivity
Dr. Karah E. Knope, Clare Boothe Luce Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
Developing an enhanced understanding of actinide chemical behavior is of great strategic and
scientific importance to areas ranging from nuclear waste management to radiochemical separations
chemistries. In comparison to the other elements of the periodic table, the chemical and physical
properties of the actinide elements are uniquely complex and the behavior of these elements is often
difficult to control and predict. Speciation (i.e. the complexes that form under a given set of conditions) is
critical to describing the behavior of these metal ions. For the actinides, speciation depends largely on
oxidation state, and our knowledge of the structural and energetic properties of tetravalent actinide
(thorium, uranium, neptunium, and plutonium) complexes is quite limited. Particularly the speciation of
Np and Pu, has posed significant challenges in the ability to predict actinide behavior under chemically
complex conditions. To fill this knowledge gap, this research will systematically address the effects of (1)
complexing ligands, (2) non-bonding interactions, and (3) functionalized surfaces on actinide speciation.
These effects will be examined through the molecular-level structural characterization of tetravalent
actinide phases formed in solution and the solid state using a suite of synthetic, spectroscopic, X-ray
diffraction and scattering techniques. Through this multi-faceted experimental approach, in combination
with complementary computational efforts, trends that govern speciation and reactivity in the early
actinides will be identified, thus opening the door to greater control and predictive ability of the solution
behavior of these elements. Fundamental insights into the factors that govern the speciation and
reactivity of various structural units could lead to technological advances in separations, process
chemistry, and the ability to predict the migration of these radionuclides in complex chemical systems.
Compounds isolated as part of this work may also serve as a basis for theoretical studies focused on the
electronic properties of the actinides and changes that occur with successive filling of the 5f orbitals, which
may be critical to understanding how the electronic configuration of the metal ion affects the chemical
and physical properties of these elements.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Exploration of Energetic Particle Confinement in Stellarators
Dr. Samuel Aaron Lazerson, Research Scientist
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL)
Princeton, NJ 08543
This research plan will explore the physics of energetic particle confinement in stellarators using data
collected from the Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X) experimental facility. In a magnetically confined fusion power
plant, alpha particles (He+2 ions) produced by the fusion of deuterium and tritium must remain confined
in the plasma long enough to transfer their kinetic energy to the plasma. This process is fundamental to
achieving a burning plasma state, sustaining the plasma temperature. These particles are considered
energetic, as their kinetic energy is much greater than that of the thermal energy of the deuterium and
tritium plasma from which they are born. In optimized stellarators such as W7-X, the three dimensional
shape of magnetic fields is tailored to provide beneficial confinement to non-energetic particles. The
neutral beam and radio frequency heating systems on W7-X provide sources of energetic particles, which
mimic the characteristics of alpha particles in a larger reactor. The presence of these particles enables the
study of how stellarator three dimensional magnetic fields affect energetic particle motion. Numerical
simulations of these particles will be compared to experimental measurements, providing validation of
the simulations. Validated simulations are then used to optimize the three dimensional shape of magnetic
fields for improved energetic particle confinement. Additionally, these simulations will help determine
the optimum location for diagnostics that are key to measuring energetic particle confinement in W7-X.
The successful demonstration of such an optimization capability will allow the development of transient-
free, steady-state power plants based on the stellarator design.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Exploiting Synergies Between Lensing and BAO Surveys for Improved Cosmological Constraints
Dr. Alexie Leauthaud-Harnett, Assistant Professor
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
Pinning down the nature of dark energy is one of the most pressing questions in modern physics.
There are multiple large missions underway, or that will begin in the next 5 years, that will address the
question of dark energy. Among these efforts are the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Survey (DESI), the Hyper
Suprime-Cam (HSC) survey, and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). DESI will measure the
distances to tens of millions of galaxies. LSST and HSC as “imaging surveys” (large maps of the sky that
reveal millions of galaxies) are designed to measure the “gravitational lensing” effect (distortion of galaxy
shapes due to the bending of space-time by intervening dark matter). These missions aim to measure the
properties of dark energy in different but complementary ways. The objectives of this research are to take
advantage of the synergies between these different approaches and data-sets in order to increase their
scientific payoff. This research will advance our understanding of dark energy as well as the theory of
gravity, and will provide robust constraints on the parameters of the standard Lambda Cold Dark Matter
(LCDM) cosmological model.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Analyzing Multifaceted Scientific Data with Topological Analytics
Dr. Joshua Levine, Assistant Professor, Computer Science
Department of Computer Science
The University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
This project will develop a new class of techniques suitable for analyzing the massive, complex
datasets currently generated with high-performance computing resources. Specifically, the major
challenge with these data is not just that they are massive in scale, but that they are multifaceted as well.
Multifaceted data represent multiple values of interest simultaneously. For example, a typical, Earth
system model might seek to understand the connections between (a) arctic sea ice, (b) the currents and
temperature of the ocean, (c) surface temperature models, (d) atmospheric behavior that affects the
surface, ocean, and ice, and (e) solar radiation's effect on the atmosphere. These values may be data from
multiple sources, may encode variability or uncertainty across parameters, or may be the result of
multiple physical models being computed simultaneously. Analyzing multifaceted data presents new
challenges in that we seek not just to understand each facet of data, but rather we also want to
understand the interactions and relationships among facets. The proposed solution develops a new field
of analysis techniques called topological analytics, which couple machine learning—techniques for
building statistical relationships—with topological analysis—techniques for analyzing the features of a
single facet of data—to develop new analyses for multifaceted data.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Probing Coherence in Nanoscale Energy Transport with High Spatial-Temporal Resolution
Dr. Bolin Liao, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
The phase coherence of microscopic energy carriers, such as electrons, phonons and photons, as well
as their collective excitations could serve as a valuable resource for energy transport and conversion.
From a thermodynamic point of view, lower entropy content is associated with higher phase coherence,
indicating the potential for a higher energy conversion efficiency. Moreover, coherent energy carriers,
e.g. lattice vibrations (phonons), can dynamically modulate the physical properties of the host material,
producing non-equilibrium states with tunable energy transport properties. Therefore, fundamental
understanding of coherent phenomena in nanoscale energy transport not only provides new
opportunities to improve the efficiency of energy conversion systems, but also holds the promise of
controlling energy transport with coherent excitations. One major challenge for directly probing coherent
transport processes is the short coherence time and length associated with microscopic energy carriers,
limiting most previous studies to cryogenic temperatures and atom-perfect samples. This research will
apply a unique and newly developed scanning ultrafast electron microscope (SUEM), a photon-pump-
electron-probe technique that combines the nanometer spatial resolution of scanning electron
microscopes with the femtosecond temporal resolution of ultrafast pulsed lasers, to probe coherent
energy transport and coherent modulation of energy transport in materials relevant to energy
applications. Specifically, time-resolved secondary electron imaging and electron diffraction will be
combined, as implemented in SUEM, to directly visualize the coherent coupling of photo-excited electron-
hole plasma with coherent phonon modes, analyze the decoherence process of coherent phonons
through phonon-phonon interaction and understand the associated entropy generation, and
demonstrate dynamic control of electron transport properties via coherent phonon excitations. The
expected outcomes will bring fundamental advancements in basic scientific understanding of coherent
interaction processes of microscopic energy carriers beyond the familiar incoherent and instantaneous
"scattering" picture (e.g. electron-phonon and phonon-phonon scatterings) and serve as a cornerstone
for future developments of coherent solar/thermal energy harvesters, coherent phonon lasers and
ultrafast electronic devices dynamically tunable by coherent phonons. The research will also establish the
newly-developed SUEM as a mature, quantitative and versatile platform to characterize ultrafast
dynamics in condensed matter systems, accompanied by a suite of multiscale simulation tools.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Understanding and Controlling Water-Organic Co-Transport in Amorphous Microporous Materials
Dr. Ryan P. Lively, Assistant Professor
School of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
Achieving revolutionary reductions in upstream and downstream industrial separations, energy
intensity has been identified as a promising approach for improving the sustainability of critical
hydrocarbon processing infrastructure. Realizing these reductions requires a “step change” in separation
technology from heat-based techniques (e.g., distillation) to molecular size- and shape-based techniques.
Molecular sieving membranes have shown promise for separating molecules based on subtle differences
in molecular size and shape; however, this sieving ability often occurs at ideal conditions far away from
what might be encountered in the field. Indeed, a critical scientific challenge is the development of
relationships between membrane microstructure and the transport of competing guest molecules (i.e.,
water molecules and organic molecules) under realistic operating conditions. To address this challenge,
this research project aims to create disordered carbonaceous molecular sieve membranes and challenge
these membranes with water-organic mixtures found in real-world settings (e.g., produced water). More
specifically, the experimental campaign conducted in this project will result in (i) the creation of a test set
of molecular sieve membranes with a variety of micropore sizes and structures, (ii) the development of
relationships between the membrane pore size/structure and the adsorption and diffusion of water-
organic mixtures within the membrane material, and (iii) the capability to predict permeation of complex
water-organic mixtures in disordered microporous membranes. The experiments and analysis conducted
in this research project will lay the foundation for new membrane technology capable of displacing
existing energy-intensive separations techniques, which would achieve the “step change” necessary for
more sustainable hydrocarbon processing industries.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Multi-ps Short-Pulse Laser-Driven Particle Acceleration for Novel HED and ICF Applications
Dr. Tammy Ma, Staff Scientist
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL)
Livermore, CA 94551
Today’s large-scale laser facilities have the unprecedented ability to compress and heat matter to
energy densities similar to those at the center of stars, allowing for the laboratory investigation of extreme
states of matter. However, measurements of fundamental material properties – such as the equation of
state and opacity – continue to be challenging due to the need that the plasma be in a single-temperature,
single-density state. Constant volume isochoric heating using energetic particle beams serves as one of
the most promising methods to achieve such conditions. Thus, there is a necessity to develop and
optimize laser-driven particle acceleration for new short-pulse Kilojoule-Petawatt laser facilities that have
recently come online such as GEKKO-LFEX (Japan), LMJ-PETAL (France), and NIF-ARC (USA), which reside
in a novel regime of very high energy (kilojoule) and relatively long (multi-picosecond (ps)) pulse lengths.
This work will explore the scaling physics of electron, proton, and light ion generation in this unique
parameter space, and utilize both demonstrated techniques for particle acceleration as well as innovative
ideas to achieve unprecedented particle beam brilliance and energies. Using an integrated experimental
and modeling approach, the fundamental physics of particle acceleration with multi-ps high intensity laser
pulses will be investigated, optimized, and applied to create and study HED matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Optimal Design of Radio Frequency Algorithms and Models for Next Generation Accelerators
Dr. Themis Mastoridis, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
California Polytechnic State University
San Luis Obispo, CA 93407
Modern particle accelerators have a broad range of significant applications in a number of scientific
fields. Advances in accelerator science lead not only to discoveries in the field of physics, but also fuel
fundamental research in a wide range of scientific and technological fields. Innovative developments in a
broad range of subfields of accelerator physics and technology are required to achieve the beam
specifications for the next generation of particle colliders and photon sources. This work is focused on the
accelerating field, which is provided by the Radio Frequency (RF) system. This project will support the
design, simulation, and analysis, of robust algorithms to configure, optimize, and control RF systems and
their feedback loops (Low Level RF) for several modern accelerator systems. The optimal configuration
and operation of the upgraded Super-Proton Synchrotron (SPS) RF system will be investigated, considering
maximum impedance reduction, hardware limitations, and noise issues. Algorithms will be developed to
configure multiple stations at the Linac Coherent Light Source II (LCLS-II). A feedback system will be
designed to achieve the specifications of the Compact Linear Collider (CLIC) and the system performance
will be estimated in terms of bunch position and power requirements using simulations. Algorithms will
be developed to match the gap transients for the US Electron-Ion Collider (EIC) project. These algorithms
will automatically adjust to beam intensity and pattern. Studies will be conducted to narrow the High
Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) crab-cavity LLRF design parameters. Control algorithms will be developed and
the system performance will be estimated. This project also has a strong educational component. At least
six undergraduate students will participate in this project each year. The students will actively engage in
cutting-edge accelerator physics research.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Constraining Neutron Star Structure with Indirect Nuclear Reaction Studies
Dr. Zach Meisel, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Ohio University
Athens, OH 45701
How matter behaves at the highest densities achieved by nature is an open question. Studies of
neutron stars, ultradense remnants from stellar explosions, provide unique windows into the behavior of
matter existing at densities beyond that of an atomic nucleus and at temperatures low enough for
quantum phenomena to emerge at macroscopic scales. Such studies often rely on comparisons between
astrophysics model calculations and astronomical observations. However, these model calculation results
sensitively depend on largely uncertain nuclear physics input. Of particular interest are the nuclear
reactions responsible for energy generation and element creation in Type I X-ray bursts, thermonuclear
explosions on the surface of a neutron star accreting material from a companion star. The objective of
this project is to remove or reduce the most significant nuclear physics uncertainties for these bursts using
indirect nuclear reaction measurements at the Edwards Accelerator Laboratory at Ohio University and the
National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan State University. To assess their impact,
measurement results will be included in state-of-the-art astrophysics model calculations of observable
phenomena from accreting neutron stars. The overall outcome of this work will be substantial
improvement in our understanding of the outer structure of accreting neutron stars and, thereby, of high-
density low-temperature matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Quantification of the Crack Evolution Process by Extracting Relevant Signal Components from Wave
Propagation and Diffusive Transport Front Measurements
Dr. Siddharth Misra, Assistant Professor
Mewbourne College of Earth and Energy
The University of Oklahoma
Norman, OK 73019
The dynamical behavior of fractures in the earth’s subsurface influences key processes that govern
the extraction of energy resources and isolation of energy wastes in the shallow crust. Fracture evolution
depends on complex interactions involving mineralogy, pore structure, rock fabric, effective mechanical
moduli, fluid saturation, and pre-existing microcracks in the rock, and also on the strain rate and the
thermal, chemical, and stress history. Such complexities and heterogeneities are subject to substantial
uncertainties, often precluding the direct translation of fracture evolution into reductionist physical
models. This project will use new geophysical signals and develop new machine learning/deep learning
algorithms that produce fresh mathematical/statistical frameworks describing crack evolution and that
create and inform improved micromechanical models that can be used to understand and predict how
fracture networks respond to external perturbations, such as those resulting from fluid injection or
extraction, under shallow crustal conditions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Molecular Photochemistry and Photocatalysis in Confinement
Dr. Karen L. Mulfort, Chemist
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
Argonne, IL 60439
The goal of this research is to understand the fundamental physical, chemical, and electronic
properties governing molecular photochemistry and photocatalysis in confinement. A central challenge
encountered in the development of molecular architectures to enable light-driven chemical
transformations is the inability to overcome typical diffusion-limited charge transfer kinetics in solution.
Another obstacle commonly faced in molecular photocatalysis is the lack of control over the molecular
interactions beyond the binding site, and understanding how the environment far beyond the first
coordination sphere influences the primary charge and energy transfer processes, and ultimately
reactivity and selectivity. In this research, these challenges will be addressed by confining modular
molecular and supramolecular architectures within nanoporous membranes and systematically
investigating the effects of confinement on photo-induced electron transfer between molecular electron
donors and acceptors, as well as electron transfer across tailored interfacial chemistry. The light-
responsive and redox-active confined molecular architectures will be probed by a variety of high-
resolution, steady-state and time-resolved optical and synchrotron X-ray characterization techniques to
capture the important features of both their ground and excited states. The research will enable the
development of sophisticated molecular architectures confined within surface-specific porous
nanostructures to: 1) control the kinetics of interfacial electron transfer to drive chemical transformations
and 2) tune the environment surrounding catalyst modules to provide control over substrate binding and
selectivity, reaction kinetics, and nanoscale separations.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
State-to-State Molecular Reactions in the Ultracold Regime
Kang-Kuen Ni, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
Chemical reactions contribute to almost all aspects of our lives, yet at the most fundamental level, a
tractable quantum-mechanical treatment of complex reactions does not exist. In fact, only after many
decades of work has the quantum description of the simplest atom exchange reaction, AB + C  A + BC,
been solved for light atoms. Reactions involving 4 atoms, AB + CD  AC + BD for example, are a new
frontier to extend the exact quantum understanding. The objective of this proposal is to gain state-to-
state experimental data for both the AB + CD and AB + C types of reactions that can be compared to
advanced theoretical calculations and elucidate the role of quantum mechanics in the processes of bond
breakage and formation. Specific examples of the potassium-rubidium metathesis reaction KRb + KRb 
K + Rb and the atom exchange reaction K + KRb  K + Rb are chosen because the technology of
2 2 2
quantum internal and motional state control of these types of molecules is ripe. This experiment will
operate at ultracold temperatures (1 mK) such that quantum effects of translational motion are an
important factor. At first glance, studying reactions at ultracold temperatures may seem counter-
intuitive. However, certain reactions become surprisingly efficient due to the wave-like nature of atoms
and molecules. At the lowest temperatures, non-classical effects such as wavefunction delocalization and
tunneling through barriers can dominate the reaction rate. Reactions in this regime will serve as a sensitive
probe to compare to high accuracy ab initio potentials and quantum scattering calculations. Pushing
theoretical frameworks to describe the 3-atom and 4-atom system studied in this proposal will ultimately
provide insight for more complex problems in chemistry and energy production.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Dynamical Aspects of the Quark Gluon Plasma
Dr. Jacquelyn Noronha-Hostler, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
Shortly after the Big Bang the entire universe was filled with a nearly perfect fluid, known as the
Quark Gluon Plasma. Relativistic heavy ion collisions can now reproduce this fluid in the laboratory. The
Quark Gluon Plasma exhibits a rapid, but smooth cross-over phase transition into hadrons at vanishing
net-baryon densities. Recent experiments plan to explore finite baryon densities, where a critical point is
expected. If found, this would mark the first discovery of a critical point in a relativistic system described
by a fundamental theory of nature, which would have far-reaching consequences for high-energy nuclear
physics and nuclear astrophysics (such as in neutron star mergers). Characteristic temperatures of
equilibrium (e.g., the inflection point of the entropy density) and transport coefficients (e.g., the minimum
of the shear viscosity over entropy density) vary widely at a cross-over phase transition, but converge at
a critical point. Extracting the behavior of these characteristic temperatures is a major focal point of this
research. Specifically, the interplay between strange and light hadrons is exploited to study the flavor
hierarchy in the cross-over region. To investigate this, a viscous relativistic hydrodynamics framework
with two conserved charges is being developed into a new open-source code, along with initial conditions
that contain baryon number and strangeness. Flow observables sensitive to the equation of state and
transport coefficients are calculated across beam energies. New techniques are developed to study this
flavor hierarchy from first principles and to extract the characteristic temperatures from experimental
data. Through the new dynamical framework, this project provides essential guidance to the Beam Energy
Scan II runs at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider and the future Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research
in Germany in the search for the Quantum Chromodynamics critical point and subsequent investigation
of the baryon-rich Quark Gluon Plasma.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Imaging Beyond the Shot Noise Limit with Quantum Electron Microscopy
Dr. Colin Ophus, Research Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) is used in materials science and biology to image structures
at very small length scales, down to individual atoms. One of the primary challenges in TEM imaging is
that using too many electrons can damage the sample. However, using too few electrons produces very
noisy images. This restriction, called the “shot noise limit,” affects all classical measurements. The
emerging field of Quantum Metrology provides a way around this limit. New quantum mechanical imaging
methods can increase TEM signal-to-noise without increasing the number of electrons needed to get good
images. The objective of this project is to use these concepts to produce instrument designs for Quantum
Electron Microscopy (QEM). A prototype instrument will be built to prove the QEM concept. Development
of future QEM instruments at Nanoscale Science Research Centers will allow researchers to image more
sensitive samples with higher resolution and clarity than ever before.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Probabilistic data fusion and physics-informed machine learning: A new paradigm for modeling under
uncertainty, and its application to accelerating the discovery of new materials
Dr. Paris Perdikaris, Assistant Professor
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
The analysis and optimization of complex physical systems from first principles requires an agile
arsenal of techniques in stochastic modeling, high-performance computing, and probabilistic machine
learning. The proposed research focuses on scalable probabilistic machine learning for scientific data
analysis. This research will enable advances in the seamless synthesis of numerical simulations with
physical experiments of variable fidelity. New research capabilities also include the discovery of governing
equations and the prediction of complex dynamics from incomplete models and incomplete data. Taken
together, these developments target the effective and judicious exploration of high-dimensional decision
spaces for identifying optimal design configurations under uncertainty. The cross-cutting nature of the
proposed tools will benefit a wide range of science domains, including applications in materials discovery
and optimization, subsurface transport, and earth system modeling.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Chemo-Mechanically Driven In Situ Hierarchical Structure Formation in Mixed Conductors
Dr. Nicola Perry, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61801
Essential materials for energy technologies tend to exhibit “hierarchical” functions – they perform
multiple, inter-related tasks at different locations, across disparate length and time scales. To best support
this heterogeneous function, there is a fundamental need to understand and direct formation of
corresponding tailored hierarchical architectures. In particular, a wide variety of applications, from energy
conversion and storage to sensing and gas separation, rely on oxide mixed ionic and electronic conductors
(MIECs). These critical ceramic materials catalyze reactions at their surfaces and transport ionic and
electronic species. Ideally, MIECs should adopt hierarchical structures with 1) high surface areas, 2)
surface compositions exhibiting high catalytic activity, and 3) microstructural connectivity in the direction
needed for fast charge transport. In practice, however, MIECs are typically fabricated at elevated
temperatures, leading to coarse, non-directional structures with poisoned (chemically segregated)
surfaces. This work therefore applies a new approach, applying stimulated chemo-mechanical actuation
to non-equilibrium films, to transform homogeneous MIECs into ideal hierarchical structures in situ. Key
questions to be addressed, leveraging DOE user facilities and a novel contact-free high throughput optical
approach, include: 1) how/why does the structure change across multiple length scales during
transformation, 2) how/why do different process variables direct hierarchical structure evolution, and 3)
how/why do the ionic/electronic transport and surface reactivity change during transformation? The new
hierarchical structures demonstrate high surface catalytic activity with potential for improved device
performance. Moreover, they serve as a platform to develop a fundamental understanding of MIEC
processing-structure-property relationships, leading to rational design for energy applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Templating Lattice-Confined Catalysts for Selective Hydrocarbon Upgrading
Dr. David Powers, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
Hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) has substantially increased the domestic supply of natural gas.
Insufficient processing infrastructure coupled with the implicit challenge of long-range transportation of
gaseous hydrocarbons, however, has prevented efficient utilization of these resources. To avoid direct
atmospheric release of light hydrocarbons, which are more potent greenhouse gases than carbon dioxide
(CO ), these resources are often burned in extraction-site flares. The development of chemistry to convert
2
light hydrocarbons to more valuable chemical feedstocks and fuels has been a long-standing goal of
catalysis. The relative carbon–hydrogen (C–H) bond strengths of hydrocarbons and the product derived
from C–H oxidation render selective hydrocarbon oxidation a serious chemical challenge. This project will
develop new synthetic methods to provide atomistic control over the active sites in porous heterogeneous
catalysts and will develop new analytical tools to characterize the reactive intermediates involved in
hydrocarbon functionalization. These investigations will provide new tools to 1) identify catalyst materials
for hydrocarbon oxidation, 2) understand the activity of the developed catalysts, and 3) tune catalyst
activity to achieve selective C–H functionalization.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Elucidating Processes Controlling Arctic Atmospheric Aerosol Sources, Aging, and Mixing States
Dr. Kerri A. Pratt, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Department of Earth & Environmental Sciences
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
The objective of this project is to determine aerosol chemical composition, sources, mixing states,
and aging processes across the entire annual cycle in the high Arctic, and in the Alaskan Arctic during fall
– winter, to address the most significant gaps in Arctic aerosol observational data. The proposed project
is based on the rapid sea ice loss across the entire Arctic, as well as the major delays in sea ice freeze-up
in the Chukchi Sea, off the North Slope of Alaska (NSA). The project will: 1) identify the sources of Arctic
aerosols as a function of season, 2) determine the mixing states and aging extents of Arctic aerosols as a
function of season, and 3) ascertain the most important factors (e.g., sea ice extent, radiation,
meteorology) modulating the sources, chemical composition, mixing states, and aging processes of Arctic
aerosols. The proposed study will focus on analysis and interpretation of Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement (ARM) field campaign samples and data collected during late fall/early winter at Utqiaġvik,
AK and during the year-long international Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic
Climate (MOSAiC) in the high Arctic. The project will use state of the art measurement techniques
including real-time aerosol time of- flight mass spectrometry (ATOFMS), on-line aerosol sizing, and off-
line computer-controlled scanning electron microscopy with energy-dispersive X-ray (CCSEM-EDX)
spectroscopy. The project will provide an unparalleled opportunity to study seasonal changes in aerosol
processes in the high Arctic. Size-resolved number fractions of observed individual particle sources will be
determined for each month, with quantitation of locally emitted vs. long-range transported aerosols.
Number fractions of aerosols internally mixed with various secondary species will be determined, and
aerosol mixing state indices will be calculated. Sea ice extent and fracturing impacts on sea spray aerosol
will be examined. For predictions of Arctic atmospheric composition and feedbacks, knowledge of aerosol
sources, mixing states, and aging processes is critical and is a significant current gap in our understanding
of Arctic aerosols. The proposed project will provide unprecedented and critical knowledge of Arctic
aerosol mixing states and processes. The overarching impact of the project will be the generation of Arctic
aerosol observational data and improved understanding of Arctic aerosol processes to inform and
evaluate future simulations of Arctic atmospheric composition and climate.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Non-Equilibrium Effects in Quantum Magnets
Dr. Kathryn (Kate) Ross, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, CO 80523
Our daily lives revolve around the use of solid state materials in non-equilibrium settings. For
instance, the electronic switching of silicon-based transistors has transformed energy and information
applications in the 20th century. Over the past few decades, quantum materials have emerged as
promising candidates for components of future technologies that could produce paradigm shifts in these
areas. Yet, the non-equilibrium properties of quantum materials (e.g. how they respond to fast switching,
or how information can propagate through such materials) are just beginning to be explored both
experimentally and theoretically. Theoretical progress is quickly being made within a class of models
based on interacting “spin” degrees of freedom known as quantum magnets, the simplest example being
the transverse field Ising model. This project will make use of neutron scattering to study material
realizations of this model after they are driven out of equilibrium by fast field pulses from resistive pulsed
magnets, i.e., “quantum quenches”. This project will provide direct connections and guidance to theories
of non-equilibrium phenomena in bulk quantum materials, as well as advances in the neutron scattering
methods used to probe non-equilibrium phenomena. These advances will fuel future discoveries in
quantum materials that may be used in next-generation technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Particle Dark Matter Across Scales
Dr. Benjamin Safdi, Assistant Professor
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Dark matter is about five times more abundant in the Universe than ordinary matter. It plays a key
role in forming galaxies like our own Milky Way. However, while dark matter is well understood on large
astrophysical scales, the identity of the microscopic dark matter particles themselves remains a mystery.
This research investigates the particle nature of dark matter. Understanding the composition of dark
matter is a key science goal of the Department of Energy High Energy Physics program. Many of the
leading particle dark matter models predict that dark matter should produce small amounts of light in
astrophysical systems and precision laboratory experiments. This research will explore possible
signatures of dark matter in astrophysical and laboratory photon data across a range of frequencies
ranging from the radio band to the gamma-ray band. The work will investigate the relationship of the
possible photon signals to the underlying theoretical dark matter models and to the spatial distribution
of dark matter in astrophysical objects like galaxies and cluster of galaxies. As an example, the research
will explore anomalous bright glows of light in the gamma-ray and X-ray bands, which have been observed
arising from the center of the Milky Way and other nearby astrophysical systems. The aim of this
investigation is to deduce whether these anomalies are due to particle dark matter interactions. If
evidence of particle dark matter is found, this evidence would shed light on the nature and composition
of dark matter, while giving greater context to how ordinary matter is embedded within the fundamental
laws of nature.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Physics-reinforced Machine Learning Algorithms for Multiscale Closure Model Discovery
Dr. Omer San, Assistant Professor
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, OK 74078
Advances in artificial intelligence have led to a renaissance in learning and extracting patterns from
complex data. Despite successes in other areas, applying machine learning techniques in the field of fluid
mechanics is relatively new. Most efforts are primarily focused on finding parameters for existing
turbulence models. This project explores a big data approach that learns from physical constraints without
assuming any heuristics for underlying turbulence physics. Our overall research program will develop
novel physics-reinforced data-driven approaches for geophysical turbulence. The research will also
involve deep learning approaches that can discover closure models for complex multiscale systems.
Research insights will facilitate the building of improved numerical weather prediction models and better
parameterization strategies for DOE mission-relevant challenges.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research and the
DOE Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Optimal and robust reconstruction of BAO, redshift-space distortions and the Alcock-Paczynski effect
Dr. Hee-Jong Seo, Assistant Professor
Ohio University
Athens, OH 45701
The goal of this project is to optimally reconstruct cosmological information that has been lost from
large-scale clustering of galaxies due to cosmic structure growth. The outcome of our research will be
used to improve dark energy and other cosmological constraints from the ongoing extended Baryon
Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (eBOSS) and the upcoming Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI).
The large-scale galaxy clustering data contain two important features: the Baryon Acoustic Oscillations
(BAO) and the overall shape from small to large scales. The latter feature has potential to improve dark
energy constraints as well as the structure growth rate (therefore the nature of Gravity) and neutrino
mass constraints. Such a feature is, however, very susceptible to various nonlinearities caused by structure
growth and/or peculiar velocities of galaxies. While the current BAO reconstruction scheme has been
successful for reducing such nonlinear effects from the BAO feature, thereby substantially improving dark
energy constraints, its performance in reducing nonlinearities from the overall shape has not been fully
investigated. This research plans to extend the success of the BAO reconstruction technique further, and
in new directions, by developing an optimal method to recover cosmological information that has been
lost from the overall shape of galaxy clustering. This research will be conducted by using the perturbation
theories and cosmological N-body simulations, and applying the resulting method to current/future galaxy
redshift survey data. The outcome will increase the overall science return of current and future dark
energy missions with little extra cost. Naturally, this will contribute to the infrastructure of such missions.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Finding missing links associated with aerosol-cloud interactions: Aqueous and cloud-phase secondary
organic aerosol formation
ManishKumar Shrivastava, Staff Scientist
Atmospheric Sciences and Global Change Division
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)
Richland, WA 99352
Interactions between clouds and aerosols play a major role in Earth’s energy budget and are among
the largest uncertainties in projections of future Earth-system changes. Cloud-aerosol interactions are
manifestations of many nonlinear processes governing the number, size, and chemical composition of
aerosols that serve as cloud condensation nuclei. Aqueous- and cloud-chemistry pathways that lead to
the formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) are some of the least understood of these processes
but could be associated with significant regional-scale heterogeneities in Earth’s aerosol, cloud, and
radiation fields. To date, representations of aqueous- and cloud-phase organic chemistry in Earth-system
models have been overly simplistic, making it difficult to diagnose how variations in the cloud, chemistry,
and meteorological regimes in the atmosphere affect aerosol-cloud interactions and radiation. Although
recent field campaigns and laboratory experiments provide a wealth of measurements, there is a
persistent gap in terms of coherently connecting these measurements to advance our understanding of
aqueous- and cloud chemistry pathways of SOA. The vision of this U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office
of Biological and Environmental Research (BER) Early Career Project is to advance the fundamental
understanding of SOA formed within aqueous aerosols and cloud droplets, thus providing a complete
description of coupling between cloud-aerosol interactions and chemistry. This will be achieved through
a multipronged approach that integrates 1) analyses of laboratory measurements and multiple field
measurements of aerosols, clouds, radiation, and the dynamic and thermodynamic structure of the
atmosphere and 2) observationally constrained high-resolution modeling approaches, which will be used
as analytical tools to assess processes governing the formation of SOA through aqueous- and cloud-
chemistry. Many of the measurements used in this research come from BER’s Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement (ARM) user facility and complementary data sets from both the Amazon and the Southern
Great Plains (SGP) sites. The proposed data analyses will elucidate new aqueous SOA processes, determine
the role of aqueous chemistry in the formation and growth of nanoparticles in the atmosphere, and
establish parameters needed to improve the predictive ability of models. Aqueous SOA processes
determined from analyses of field and laboratory measurements will be incorporated in a high-resolution
regional model to investigate how these processes are manifested in the chemical and dynamic evolution
of SOA in the atmosphere. Additionally, large eddy simulations will be conducted to investigate how
subgrid-scale aqueous SOA chemistry processes and cloud-aerosol cycling affect aerosol-cloud
interactions. This work will lead to groundbreaking new insights and discoveries that can be used to
improve large-scale, Earth-system models and inform further research on aqueous- and cloud-phase SOA
formation. A solid understanding of the coupling between atmospheric aqueous SOA chemistry and
clouds is critical to advance our understanding of Earth’s energy budget and to address some of the most
critical scientific questions facing the nation and DOE.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Portable Parallel Algorithms and Frameworks for Exascale Graph Analytics
Dr. Julian Shun, Assistant Professor
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Graphs are used to model the interactions among various entities in a wide variety of fields
including biology, chemistry, and cyber-security. Analyzing the structure and properties of graphs is an
important component of the scientific discovery process for many applications. With the explosion in the
volume of data, graphs have become very large and can contain more than hundreds of billions of vertices
and trillions of edges. Analyzing these graphs efficiently is a significant hurdle. This project will make large-
scale graph analytics more efficient and accessible to scientists, thereby improving the efficiency of
scientific data analysis in critical DOE mission areas. First, this project will design parallel graph algorithms
that are efficient both in theory and in practice so that they can perform well under all possible inputs and
across many machine parameters, and scale gracefully to larger data sets. Using these algorithms,
scientists will be able to perform analytics on massive graphs on exascale platforms much more efficiently
than before, and confidently predict the performance of the algorithms due to their theoretical
guarantees. Second, this project will develop a domain specific language for graph computations to reduce
the programming effort required by scientists and ensure that the analysis codes run efficiently on a
variety of different platforms.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Bio-inspired Polymer Membranes for Resilience of Electrochemical Energy Devices
Dr. Meredith N. Silberstein, Assistant Professor
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York 14853
Electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices such as batteries and fuel cells function by
creating a difference in electrical potential across two electrodes that drive electron flow through a circuit
to power devices. The polymer membrane that separates these electrodes is critical for controlling ion
transport and must be mechanically robust. The objectives of this planned research are to discover the
fundamental physical mechanisms for self-regulation of synthetic polymers and gels under electric fields.
Biological membranes are constantly assessing evolving conditions such as electric field and optimizing
their function by dynamically adjusting their properties. In contrast the current generation of polymer
membranes are static and unable to readily adjust to changing operating conditions making them less
durable and vulnerable to performance degradation. This in turn has adverse consequences for device
operation and sometimes even for safe use. Membrane performance and durability can be dramatically
improved by imbuing the polymer membrane with the ability to sense and adapt to the local
electrochemical environment, similar to what is possible in biological membranes. Enabled by the
emerging approaches for tailoring polymers through modulating the mechanical strength of particular
bonds, this unexplored concept will be pursued computationally through simulations that explicitly
represent the atomic structure of the material and development of theories that describe the overall
material behavior. The findings will then be experimentally proven by making and characterizing polymers
with mechanical and self-healing properties that should be dynamically tunable by electric fields. This
work will open up a new concept in design of polymer membranes that predictably self-regulate internal
bonding dynamics and interactions in response to changes in external electrical fields to tune
instantaneous mechanical properties such as stiffness and strength, paving the way for safer and more
durable electrochemical energy devices.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Precision Computations in Strongly Coupled Conformal Field Theories
Dr. David Simmons-Duffin, Assistant Professor
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
Quantum field theory (QFT) is a universal language for theoretical physics, describing everything from
particle physics to exotic materials to magnets and boiling water. However, precise computations in QFT
are often extremely difficult. Tools for studying the simplest (so-called "weakly-coupled") QFTs were
developed in the 20th century. However, many of the most important QFTs are "strongly-coupled" and
cannot be studied with these tools. The goal of this research is to develop new tools for precise
computations in strongly-coupled QFTs. The work will focus on conformal field theories (CFTs), which
describe phase-transitions (for example, water turning into vapor), and are basic building blocks of general
QFTs. The special mathematical structure of CFTs can lead to powerful predictions that work even in
strongly-coupled theories. This research will explore this structure using a combination of pen-and-paper
and computer-based techniques.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Towards a Next Generation Search for Time-Reversal Violation Using Optically Addressable Nuclei in
Cryogenic Solids
Dr. Jaideep Taggart Singh, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
Certain rare pear-shaped nuclei have unmatched sensitivity to new kinds of forces between subatomic
particles that are not the same when the arrow of time is reversed. Such forces are believed to be
responsible for the near absence of antimatter in the observable Universe. These rare isotopes, some for
the first time, will be produced in large numbers at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams currently under
construction at Michigan State University providing an unprecedented opportunity to probe for new
physics. In anticipation, we will use abundant isotopes to develop new techniques to manipulate nuclei
embedded inside an optically transparent solid at cryogenic temperatures. Implantation into a solid, such
as neon and argon, is potentially an effective way to both efficiently capture and repeatedly probe the
small number of rare nuclei, such as radium and protactinium. An optically transparent host medium at
cryogenic temperatures would allow for the laser manipulation of the nuclei in a thermally quiet and
stable environment for a wide variety of guest species such as polar molecules. In such systems, the nuclei
are exposed to extraordinarily large electric fields and magnetic field gradients, which significantly
amplifies the measurability of certain time-reversal violating effects. The potential sensitivity of this new
approach could be at least a few hundred times greater than the current leading experiment which uses
mercury atoms.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Rational Sub-Nanometer Manipulation of Polymer Morphology for Efficient Chemical Separations
Dr. Zachary P. Smith, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Molecules are almost always found in impure mixtures, but to be useful, they need to be separated
and purified into their individual components. In many cases, the most challenging separations are for
small molecules that differ by less than an Angstrom (0.1 nm) in size, a dimension that is approximately
equivalent to only one millionth the thickness of a strand of human hair. These challenging separations
are often accomplished by processes like distillation, which require energy-intensive phase changes, or
absorption, which require the use of environmentally harmful solvents. An energy efficient and
environmentally friendly alternative to these traditional processes is membrane-based separations.
Today, nearly all gas separation membranes are formed from entropically disordered yet easily
processable polymers, which can be formed at scale into selective thin films of only 100 nm thick.
Unfortunately, the disordered nature of these state-of-the-art polymers precludes using them for some
of the most energy-intensive and environmentally relevant separations that are practiced today. This
research program envisions a strategic shift in materials design to template ordered free volume elements
into otherwise entropically disordered polymers. Free volume elements describe the nanoscopic spacing
devoid of electron density that allows molecules to diffuse in polymer films. To create isoporous free
volume elements with molecular precision, processable polymers are synthesized with chemical moieties
of the exact shape and size of small molecules that need to be separated. By tethering these moieties to
a polymer backbone by weak chemical bonds, selective thin films can be formed using traditional
approaches. However, after forming the films, these bonds can be selectively and quantitatively broken.
Through careful experimental design, these moieties decompose into small molecules and can be
removed from the polymer matrix, leaving behind isoporous free volume elements designed for a specific
separation. Various chemical moieties can be incorporated to leverage the versatility of this approach for
a variety of separation applications. In addition to the potential benefits in separation performance, this
strategy also permits access to creating polymers that have identical chemical composition but unique
packing structures, which can enable a fundamental decoupling of materials performance from processing
considerations. To target these opportunities, advanced strategies in design, synthesis, and
characterization will be coupled with theory to create new membrane materials capable of separating
complex chemical mixtures into pure molecules with Angstrom-level resolution.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Development of high throughput techniques for superconducting microfabrication, assembly and
deployment for future high energy physics experiments
Dr. Aritoki Suzuki, Staff Scientist
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
Berkeley, CA 94720
How did the universe begin? What is the universe composed of? How did the universe evolve over
time? These are some of the most fundamental questions about the universe that fascinate many of us.
Advancements in technologies have been a key element that has ushered in the era of precision
cosmology to answer these questions. Among many technological advances, microfabrication processes
made it possible to produce high performance detectors with its ability to realize fine resolution features
and access to exotic materials. This project is intended to establish high-performance microfabrication
capabilities for ultrasensitive, superconducting detectors and readout electronics components with
commercial foundries, and to boost manufacturing throughput while improving quality and lowering cost.
The developed processes could be used for cosmological experiments such as those that seek to improve
measurements of tiny fluctuations in the universe’s oldest light, the Cosmic Microwave Background
radiation, or that seek to find low-mass dark matter particles, and they could also benefit quantum
computing.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Elucidating the Morphological Instability Mechanisms during Electroplating of Active Metals
Dr. Ming Tang, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering
Rice University
Houston, Texas 77005
The objective of this research is to understand how a group of metals relevant to batteries develop
unstable growth morphology during the electrodeposition or electroplating process, a process important
for the function of batteries. These metals include alkali metals (e.g. lithium, sodium and potassium) and
zinc that have large atomic mobility and high reactivity with the electrolytes used during the battery
process. They are very attractive electrode candidates for the next-generation rechargeable batteries that
promise several times higher energy density at lower cost. However, the prevalent formation of highly
non-uniform morphologies, represented by the growth of filament-like and moss-like structures, presents
a major barrier to their successful application since it causes rapid capacity fading and even internal
shorting of the batteries. This research focuses on an important question that has received little attention
so far: Does plating-induced residual stress play a critical role in inducing the morphological instability of
the electroplated active metals? Using zinc as the main model system, this question will be investigated
through three integrated tasks: (1) quantification of the correlation between plating stress and
morphology, (2) three-dimensional imaging of the microstructure and chemical distribution of the mossy
structure at nanoscale, and (3) the development of stress-aware electroplating models across length
scales to interpret experimental observations and provide further predictions. The outcome of this work
will close a fundamental knowledge gap in the electrodeposition of active metals and potentially establish
the scientific basis for developing stress-based methods to overcome a key failure mode of advanced
batteries.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Splitting Photons: Singlet Fission in Nanocrystal-Molecule Hybrid Structures
Dr. Ming Lee Tang, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of California, Riverside
Riverside, CA 92521
The goal of this research is to enable all the energy contained in sunlight to be harvested by making
full use of the blue and green wavelengths of light. Current systems are unable to extract all of the energy
available from photons in this wavelength range due to rapid relaxation processes that dissipate a
considerable fraction of the energy as heat. In this work, inexpensive earth-abundant components capable
of supporting multi-excitonic processes involving more than one tightly bound excited state are
investigated as a way to exceed the Shockley-Queisser limit of solar cells. The research will examine hybrid
organic-inorganic nanostructures capable of singlet fission, a process by which one high-energy spin-
singlet state is converted into two lower-energy spin-triplet states, and subsequent triplet exciton
transfer. Specifically, the organic molecules diphenylhexatriene and tetracene that maximally absorb blue
light and are known to exhibit singlet fission will be bound to lead chalcogenide nanocrystals. A variety of
steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopic techniques will be used to study energy transfer from the
spin-triplet excitons created in the organic molecules to the nanoparticle acceptors. The hybrid
nanostructures will be fully characterized both in solution or thin film via electronic absorption and
photoluminescence spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, high-resolution mass
spectrometry, transmission electron microscopy, photoelectron spectroscopy, time correlated single
photon counting and transient absorption experiments. The effect of molecular and nanocrystal structure
on the electronic coupling between the hybrid components will be examined to establish fundamental
relationships between structure and triplet energy transfer efficiency. The findings will be applicable to a
potential tetracene-silicon platform that may ultimately enhance the power conversion efficiency of
silicon solar cells.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
GPU/FPGA Accelerated Deep Learning Technique Development for Discovering Physics in Liquid Argon
Time Projection Chambers
Dr. Kazuhiro Terao, Associate Staff Scientist
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
The experimental observation of neutrino oscillations, a physics phenomenon that proves neutrinos
have mass, is one of the most intriguing and active developments in physics beyond the Standard Model
during the last decades. Detector technologies that allow high precision measurement of neutrino
interactions are needed more than ever. The liquid argon time projection chamber (LArTPC) is an imaging
detector that can record charged particle trajectories at sub-millimeter spatial resolution with detailed
calorimetric (energy deposit) information, making it the detector of choice for current and future
accelerator neutrino experiments. The Short Baseline Neutrino (SBN) program employs three ≈100 ton
LArTPC detectors at a short distance (≈1km) to investigate the electron neutrino excess observed in
MiniBooNE experiment, which could be an indication of new types of neutrinos. The Deep Underground
Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) employs four 10 kiloton LArTPCs to search for proton decays and measure
neutrino oscillations at a long distance (≈1300km) which may shed light to one of remaining questions in
physics, the asymmetry in the presence of matters and anti-matter in the current universe. Despite the
potential of this novel detector technology, data reconstruction and analysis techniques for large scale
LArTPC detectors remain challenging after many years of software development effort. This project brings
modern machine learning algorithms from the field of computer vision and artificial intelligence to
develop a high quality data reconstruction chain that enables physics measurements in SBN and DUNE
experiments. The core of this research is R&D of innovative software algorithms as well as the hardware
acceleration using graphical processing units (GPUs) and field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). These
developments will target near term physics measurements in the SBN program to benchmark the
developed reconstruction algorithms. The outcome of this research project will allow us to use the full
potential of LArTPC detectors to discover new physics and answer the fundamental questions of the
universe.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Towards table-top neutrino detectors: A 10 kg Skipper-CCD experiment
Dr. Javier Tiffenberg, Associate Scientist
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL)
Batavia, IL 60510
The Skipper Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) is a ground breaking technology that is opening
unprecedented windows to the universe through the detection of single photons and electrons.
Fundamentally, a CCD is an integrated circuit etched onto a silicon surface forming sensitive elements
called pixels. When light or other particles interact with the silicon they produce an ionization charge that
is collected in the pixels. On standard CCDs this charge is discarded after it is measured as part of the
readout process. In contrast, the Skipper-CCD is able to make multiple non-destructive measurements of
the pixel’s charge and uses this additional information to reduce the readout noise to a negligible level.
The first gram-scale instrument using the Skipper-CCD technology was produced in 2016 at the Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory in collaboration with the Lawrence Berkeley MicroSystems Lab. This
prototype system was able, for the first time, to unambiguously and reliably detect single electrons over
millions of pixels reaching the theoretical limit of silicon ionization sensors. The overarching goal of this
project is to explore the potential of the Skipper-CCD technology to scale up to particle detectors with
thousands of sensors and tens of kilograms of active mass. This technological leap will open a new path
for the next generation of short baseline neutrino oscillation experiments and dark matter searches.
Furthermore, it will provide a novel nuclear reactor monitoring option for Non-Proliferation Treaty
Verification. Skipper-CCD sensors also have natural and immediate applications to imaging and
spectroscopic instruments for astronomical, quantum physics and biomedical research. This project will
develop the tools to enable the adoption of the Skipper-CCD technology for a wide range of future high-
sensitivity instruments.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Interaction and Transport Effects in Driven Magnetic and Topological Materials
Dr. Wang-Kong Tse, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
Quantum materials, when driven by light into highly non-equilibrium conditions, can exhibit novel
and non-trivial properties not available in equilibrium. Understanding driven quantum matter could
enable efficient photovoltaic applications and powerful quantum information technology. An important
class of quantum materials is comprised of van der Waals crystals (e.g. graphene), which are characterized
by their atomically thin structure and bonding through the van der Waals force. While there has been
much progress in the investigation of van der Waals crystals and heterostructures due to their novel
magnetic and topological properties, their non-equilibrium behavior is not fully understood. Bridging the
two fields of van der Waals materials and non-equilibrium matter, the planned research aims to firmly
understand and demonstrate the possibility to control van der Waals materials under strongly non-
equilibrium conditions. This project will involve studies of three key interwoven topics: (1) exploring the
effects of strong electromagnetic fields on magnetic van der Waals trilayer structures; (2) understanding
the effects of electronic interaction in strongly driven van der Waals systems; (3) investigating nonlinear
transport properties in strongly driven van der Waals systems. Developments in these three key areas are
expected to bring significant progress in finding novel strategies to control the magnetic, interaction, and
transport properties in non-equilibrium quantum materials.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Fluctuations in Quantum Materials
Joshua J. Turner, Staff Scientist
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Menlo Park, CA 94025
This research will study fluctuations in charge, spin, or orbital order that underlie collective dynamics
in quantum materials. A new method developed for accessing these fluctuations at low energies and on
their natural timescales is key to understanding the relationship between fluctuations and the range of
phases and transitions in these types of complex solids. These fluctuations are relevant to properties such
as magnetism, poor metallic conductivity, charge ordering, and superconductivity. The main focus of this
work will be to unravel unconventional superconductivity and its relationship to other electronic phases
by studying the fluctuations involved. The tool for this research, called X-ray quanta fluctuation scattering
or XQFS, has initially been used to investigate magnetic materials at SLAC’s X-ray free-electron laser. Early
results show tremendous potential for providing important new insight into how the materials respond
to internal fluctuations near phase transitions. By harnessing coherent X-rays, XQFS directly measures
spin or charge fluctuations on a timescale that was previously unavailable. This work focuses on further
developing this method as well as using it to study superconductivity in quantum materials. The research
will provide a fresh perspective on fundamental interactions and how multiple connecting aspects of
electron behavior give rise to novel phases of matter.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Next Generation Superconducting Radio Frequency (SRF) Cavities with Optimized RF Performance via
Energetic Condensation Thin Film Technology
Dr. Anne-Marie Valente-Feliciano, Staff Scientist
Superconducting Radiofrequency (SRF) Institute, Accelerator Division
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
Newport News, VA 23606
A key to future generations of particle accelerators is to sustain the highest possible acceleration kick
with minimum construction and operation costs. Bulk niobium (Nb) is currently the standard material
used in superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) accelerating cavities. Current techniques are approaching
the fundamental limit of this material. The greatest potential for new performance capabilities and cost
reduction lies with methods and materials that directly engineer the sub-micron-thick critical surface layer
of superconducting material inside cavities. Recent strides in the development of novel deposition
techniques (energetic ion vacuum deposition) open the door to the production of engineered SRF surfaces
either as a single layer superconductor, such as niobium on copper (Nb/Cu), or multilayered
superconductor-insulator-superconductor structures. This innovation promises to extend the
performance of SRF Nb cavities beyond the current material limits. While conventional deposition
techniques rely on thermally induced growth processes, which limit the deposition quality of refractory
materials such as Nb and its compounds on low temperature substrates (Cu) , energetic ion deposition
techniques allow film growth processes to be manipulated, to produce high quality crystalline materials
with excellent adhesion to the substrate and sharp, clean transitions between layers. The increased
flexibility and control of the deposition processes lead to films with improved characteristics. This research
focuses on the development of SRF cavities coated with (1) vanguard-quality Nb films and (2) nanometric
Nb Sn-based multilayered structures. Ultimately, both thin film technologies will be integrated to produce
3
fully engineered SRF surfaces useful at different frequencies, and at possibly higher temperatures. These
highly performing thin film SRF cavities will also simplify the accelerating system, dramatically changing
the cost framework of SRF accelerators. The final integrated concept will provide significantly improved
RF performance, higher efficiency and quality control for accelerating structures relevant to next
generation research accelerators for science and other societal and commercial applications.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Quantum Criticality and Topology in Non-Equilibrium Systems
Dr. Romain Vasseur, Assistant Professor
Physics Department
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Hadley, MA 01035
A key goal of condensed matter physics research is to identify new phases of matter, and to
understand the universal features of the phase transitions between them. In the past decade, physicists
have uncovered a wealth of new phases with interesting surface properties, exemplified by the theoretical
prediction and subsequent experimental discovery of topological insulators and superconductors.
Traditional condensed matter systems are usually in a thermal equilibrium state and typically at very low
temperatures. Very recently, experimental advances have sparked interest in the non-equilibrium setting.
Non-equilibrium systems can host new phases and phenomena with no equilibrium counterpart, and
could also enable robust ways to build quantum memory devices to store and manipulate quantum
information in a coherent manner. These phases and phenomena are inherently `dynamical': they are
described not by changes in the arrangement or structure of the constituent particles, but instead marked
by sharp distinctions in how the particles move and exchange energy or quantum information. The
discovery of robust non-equilibrium phases raises many fundamental questions: Can a systematic theory
of states of matter and of dynamical transitions between such states be developed? How can such states
be realized and probed experimentally? This research will explore the emergence of topological phases
and quantum criticality (two cornerstones of modern condensed matter physics in equilibrium) in such
non-equilibrium quantum systems. Specific goals include (1) using tensor networks to efficiently represent
non-equilibrium states of matter and their phase transitions; (2) studying and designing new probes for
periodically driven systems; and (3) developing analytic and numerical tools to analyze non-equilibrium
topological phase transitions. Advances in these directions will be achieved using novel techniques
appropriate to study the non-equilibrium dynamics in many-body quantum systems combining strong
interactions and randomness. This research will lead to a new conceptual framework for understanding
the emergence of quantum critical and topological properties in quantum systems far from thermal
equilibrium.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Novel Experimental Probes of Quantum Chromodynamics in Semi-Inclusive Deep-Inelastic Scattering
and e+e- Annihilation
Dr. Anselm Vossen, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
The mass of most visible matter in the universe is due to the dynamics of the interaction of quarks
and gluon inside nucleons. While the theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) provides an accurate
description of the fundamental laws governing strong interactions, a comprehensive description of the
dynamics that give rise to the observed properties of the nucleon still eludes us. We aim to develop
experimental and analysis techniques that make full use of the unprecedented statistical power provided
by the datasets to be collected at the upgraded electron scattering facility at the Jefferson National
Accelerator Laboratory (JLab). In particular, we plan to utilize correlations in the angular distributions of
particles produced from quarks when nucleons are broken up in hard scattering events and their
polarizations. These methods will have broad applications in the exploration of QCD. With the first
datasets collected at the upgraded JLab we can for example gain insight into the force that the gluon fields
inside the nucleon exert on the quarks as they move through the field as well as elucidate the role of spin
in the formation of bound quark states. Combining these results with an independent measurement in
e+-e- annihilation, using data from the new SuperKEKB facility in Japan, will allow us to disentangle the
effects of interactions of the quark inside the nucleon from those the quark underwent after the breakup
of the nucleon.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Nuclear Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Understanding the Optoelectronic Properties of Doped 2D Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskite
Quantum Wells: Towards Efficient Ultrafast Quantum Well IR Photodetectors
Dr. Luisa Whittaker-Brooks, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
The detection of low-energy photons is important for numerous applications such as defense
(navigation, night vision, and weapons detection), remote sensing, cryogenic wind tunnels, optical
communication (aerospace and terrestrial), infrared cameras, and biomedical and thermal imaging. The
fabrication of efficient and low-cost, large–area infrared (IR) photodetectors comprising defect–tolerant
materials is still a challenge since the only way of growing these materials is by using laborious and
expensive vacuum deposition techniques. Recently, quantum well IR photodetectors have emerged as an
alternative choice due to their low cost, high reproducibility and uniformity, and ease of fabrication when
compared with traditional silicon bulk IR photodetectors. This research will develop two–dimensional (2D)
organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite (OIHP) multiple quantum wells having strong spin–orbit coupling,
high carrier mobility, and tunable quantum well structures. The studies will shed light on new
breakthroughs in both materials design and modulation of fundamental physical phenomena by carefully
elucidating the role of dopants, sample heterogeneity, orientation, structure, and bias stress effects on
the performance of 2D OIHP IR photodetectors. The research efforts also involve the use of in situ and in
operando characterization tools to generate a mechanistic understanding of the degradation processes
and/or phase transformations occurring in 2D OIHP quantum well IR photodetectors under working
conditions. The research, when brought to fruition, will significantly impact the development of 2D OIHPs
for IR photodetectors while being simultaneously cost–competitive and solution processable. Moreover,
these 2D OIHP –when optimized in thin films– will perhaps be one of the few doped materials available
for ultrafast short-to-mid wavelength IR photodetection.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Mesoscale Defect Interaction Mechanisms in Structural Alloys
Dr. Haixuan Xu, Assistant Professor
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37911
Materials in radiation environments such as nuclear reactors develop microstructural damage over
time through the accumulation of defects created by the radiation. The defect interaction and evolution
control microstructural changes during irradiation processes and determine materials’ properties and
performance. The defect interaction and evolution process is multiscale in time (from femtoseconds to
decades) and length (from angstroms to meters) and has been extensively studied experimentally at
macroscales and at atomistic scale through modeling and simulation. However, there exists a significant
gap in understanding these phenomena at mesoscales (intermediate time and length scales). Mesoscale
interactions are critically important for understanding how defects lead to changes in materials’
properties and performance as they represent the transition from local atomistic events to macroscopic
effects. This research aims to develop a mesoscale mechanistic understanding of radiation-induced defect
interaction and evolution in pure metals and metal alloys, using a recently co-developed approach called
“SEAKMC” that is ideal for the research at the mesoscale where these interactions are less understood.
The understanding developed will provide the basis for extending the operating life of structural materials
in existing nuclear reactors and the development of next-generation structural materials for use in future
nuclear energy systems. This project will also advance computational capabilities at the mesoscale, which
will be widely applicable to other fields of materials science, physics, and chemistry.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Non-volatile Active Control of Spin Transport Using Interfaces with Molecular Ferroelectrics
Dr. Xiaoshan Xu, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics and Astronomy
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Lincoln, NE 68588
Spintronics (spin electronics), which studies both spin and charge degrees of freedom of electrons
and their couplings, already demonstrated important applications such as in the read head of hard disks,
based on the effect of magnetic field on the electric current flowing through magnet/nonmagnet
interfaces. Presently, the spintronics research focuses on elucidating the mechanism for variation of the
spin degree of freedom (spin current), as a foundation for the next-generation information storage,
computing, and energy conversion applications. In the past decades, significant advancement in the
generation and detection of spin current have being made, using magnet/nonmagnet interfaces and using
non-magnetic materials with strong coupling between the spin and charge degrees of freedom (spin-orbit
coupling). In contrast, the manipulation of spin current has been much less studied. This project studies
the non-volatile active control of spin current using interfaces with molecular ferroelectrics, crystalline
materials that exhibit spontaneous electrical dipoles switchable by an external electric field. The results
of the project will not only deepen understanding of the effect of interfacial arrangement of atoms and
electrons on the spin current through the magnet/nonmagnet interfaces, but also will shed light on the
mechanism of charge and spin current in crystalline organic semiconductors. In addition, it will provide
insight on the tunability of charge/spin current conversion in spin-orbit coupled materials by adjusting
their subtle arrangement of electrons. The success of this project is anticipated to open new routes in
non-volatile control of spin current, which is an important step toward spin-based electronic circuits.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences and the DOE Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Probing New Physics with Tau Leptons using the CMS Detector
Dr. Rachel P. Yohay, Assistant Professor
Department of Physics
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 32306
The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics is a thoroughly well-tested theory of all electroweak
scale phenomena to date, the most recent test being the discovery of the long-predicted Higgs boson
particle. However, much evidence exists to suggest that the model is incomplete. On the formal side, the
mass of the Higgs particle itself is perplexingly small. On the experimental side, among other things, the
SM lacks a candidate to account for dark matter, which is now known to play an indispensable role in
astrophysical large scale structure formations. Many theories that address such fundamental puzzles of
the SM predict the existence of multiple Higgs bosons, including a very light boson that couples
preferentially to third-generation fermions. Observation of a new light boson would therefore provide a
distinctive sign of new dynamics in nature. As the world’s most energetic particle accelerator complex,
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland
is an ideal laboratory for producing and studying a light Higgs state that may provide the missing piece in
the SM puzzle. This research program plans to use the large and growing dataset collected by the Compact
Muon Solenoid (CMS) detector at the LHC to explore boosted signatures of tau leptons decaying from a
new light boson to efficiently reconstruct tau final states. To this end, a supporting aim of the program is
to refurbish and recommission the CMS innermost silicon pixel tracking system by replacing power
converters in order to sustain high radiation levels and increased data rates foreseen during future CMS
operations, and thereby, increase the overall availability of the tracker for improved tau identification and
momentum measurements. Going forward, the associated High-Luminosity LHC detector upgrade of CMS
will take advantage of a high granularity calorimeter that will allow unprecedented imaging of boosted
taus arising from the production of light bosons. Overall, the search for new particles and their
interactions coupled with a technologically advanced detector will aim to provide unique insights into our
understanding of nature.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of High Energy Physics.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Building Artificial Layered Solids from the Bottom-up: Materials by Design to Enable New Energy
Technologies
Dr. Guihua Yu, Assistant Professor
Materials Science and Engineering Program
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Texas Materials Institute
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
Synthetic nanostructured inorganic solids are emerging as promising building blocks for a broad
range of applications from electronics, optoelectronics, to energy and environmental technologies, given
that their chemical and physical properties can be controlled and optimized by tunable parameters such
as size, morphology, crystal structure, chemical composition and surface/interface. As dimensionality is
one of the defining parameters in nanoscience, the same chemical compound may exhibit drastically
different properties depending on how the atoms are structurally arranged in dimension. The objectives
of this research are to develop a suite of structurally controlled artificial two-dimensional (2D) layered
solids from the bottom-up (Lego-like piece-by-piece), and to enable new synthetic tools for functional
nanosheet materials beyond graphene. Combined with computational simulations to guide design,
rational synthesis of inorganic 2D crystals will be integrated with their self-assembly and predictable
organization of molecular assemblies to form artificial layered solids. This research will expand
fundamental knowledge on how nanoscale synthesis and self-assembly can encode properties and
functionality into materials in a predictable manner. The new materials by design platform of artificial
layered solids with exceptional catalytic/transport properties will have direct implications for advanced
energy science and technologies.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
The Emergent Photophysics and Photochemistry of Molecular Polaritons: A Theoretical and
Computational Investigation
Dr. Joel Yuen-Zhou, Assistant Professor
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
When molecules are placed between closely spaced mirrors, they interact strongly with the photons
that are trapped between them, generating new quantum states that are no longer exclusively material
nor photonic alone, but rather, coherent superpositions of both. These hybrid states are known as
molecular polaritons, given that they arise from the strong interaction of the electric field of light and the
electrical polarization of the molecules. Recent experimental advances in fabrication of molecular
polariton architectures have successfully demonstrated the feasibility to control the rate and outcome of
a certain class of chemical reactions in condensed phases. Importantly, these reactions proceed in strongly
dissipative environments such as liquid solvents and lossy mirrors that allow for photons to escape from
their confinement. The purpose of this research is to formulate quantum mechanical theories and
computational tools that can elucidate the origin of these intriguing phenomena and simultaneously
predict capabilities that this new generation of molecular materials affords. Attention is placed on
harnessing polaritons to carry out photophysics and photochemistry that challenge existing paradigms,
such as the optimization of energy conversion processes in organic solar cell or light-emitting devices, or
unconventional phenomena such as long-range excitation energy transfer, remote control of chemical
reactions, and a new quantum mechanical regime of chemical reactivity resulting from wavefunction
overlaps among a large number of molecular polaritons (Bose condensation). This research explores a
frontier of chemistry and physics where electrons, vibrations, and photons interact strongly with each
other to generate emergent behavior that can be creatively exploited to address contemporary challenges
in Basic Energy Sciences.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Improved Biofuel Production through Discovery and Engineering of Terpene Metabolism in
Switchgrass
Dr. Philipp Zerbe, Assistant Professor
Department of Plant Biology
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95618
Plants employ complex and often species-specific networks of small molecules to cope with
environmental challenges as well as to communicate with other organisms. In many major crops, a diverse
group of metabolites, called terpenes, function as key biochemical mechanisms to respond to different
stresses and are essential to agricultural productivity. As terpenes are also used as precursors for
renewable biodiesel and aviation fuels, a better understanding of their biochemical networks can be used
to generate stress-tolerant crops with enhanced potential for biofuel production. This project will
investigate and harness terpene-mediated stress defense mechanisms in switchgrass (Panicum virgatum),
which is a valuable bioenergy crop due to its high net energy efficiency. Genetic, genomic, biochemical,
and protein structural analyses will be used to gain detailed knowledge of the biosynthetic machinery
controlling the switchgrass terpene network. Plant-microbe interactions will also be studied to better
understand the role of terpenes in the plant’s response to stresses such as drought. The knowledge thus
obtained on the biological function of terpenes will be applied to carry out advanced genome engineering
of switchgrass and develop varieties with improved stress resilience and tailored terpene blends for
advanced biofuel production on marginal land, advancing BER’s objective of developing sustainable and
renewable bioenergy resources that do not compete with food agriculture.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
FY 2018 DOE Office of Science Early Career Research Program Award Abstracts (06-27-2018)
Studying Nuclear Astrophysics with Inertial Fusion Implosions
Dr. Alex Zylstra, Scientist
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
Los Alamos, NM 87545
Throughout the universe, nuclear reactions play a critical role in the dynamics of stars and the
formation of the elements. They are responsible for the production of all elements other than hydrogen,
through processes including big-bang nucleosynthesis, stellar nucleosynthesis, and production of heavy
elements in explosive scenarios such as supernovae and neutron-star mergers. Fusion reactions are the
primary energy source of the stars, determining their physical properties and lifetime. In the universe
these processes occur in a plasma environment that is fundamentally different from accelerators, where
nuclear physics is typically studied. Laser-fusion facilities in the United States, notably the National Ignition
Facility and Omega, can generate plasmas at extreme conditions, with temperatures up to hundreds of
millions of degrees, densities many times higher than lead, and pressures exceeding 100 billion
atmospheres. These plasma conditions are comparable to many astrophysical systems, including the
universe a few minutes after the big bang and the core of our sun, and can include neutron fluxes
comparable to supernovae and neutron-star mergers, unlike any other laboratory source. This project will
use these plasmas to study several aspects of nucleosynthesis in the laboratory, including the production
of elements in stars, during the big bang, and in supernovae or neutron star mergers, and do so in
conditions directly analogous to astrophysics. These data will fundamentally improve our understanding
of how the elements were produced.
This research was selected for funding by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences.
